<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 88 Issue 88 (Monday, May 8, 2023)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 88, Number 88 (Monday, May 8, 2023)]
[Notices]
[Pages 29666-29670]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2023-09802]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

[Docket No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2023-0216: FRL-10833-01-OAR]


Development of Guidance for Zero-Emission Clean Heavy-Duty 
Vehicles, Port Equipment, and Fueling Infrastructure Deployment Under 
the Inflation Reduction Act Funding Programs

AGENCY: Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

ACTION: Notice; request for information (RFI).

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: To support development of potentially multiple funding 
programs under the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, EPA invites public 
comment to inform the availability of zero-emission technologies in the 
heavy-duty vehicle and port sectors. Although EPA already has 
considerable information about the availability of certain types of 
these technologies, in order to ensure that EPA has the most 
comprehensive and current information available in this dynamic space, 
EPA is inviting this comment. EPA is especially interested in comments 
detailing the availability, market price, and performance of zero-
emission trucks, zero-emission port equipment, electric charging and 
other fueling infrastructure needs for zero-emission technologies in 
the near term (1-3 years, and 1-5 years for port equipment), and 
whether the components of these systems are manufactured in the United 
States. The Build America Buy America Act (BABA) requires iron, steel, 
manufactured products, and construction materials used in 
infrastructure projects funded by federal financial assistance to be 
produced in the United States. While BABA provides the opportunity for 
EPA to issue certain waivers to these requirements, approval depends on 
many factors, including the price and availability of domestically 
sourced materials and products. With responses to this RFI EPA seeks to 
improve in particular the Agency's understanding of availability and 
differences in zero-emission class 6 and 7 trucks, zero-emission trucks 
that serve ports and port equipment as well as their related charging 
and fueling infrastructure requirements. This information will enable 
EPA to effectively design programs to expeditiously fund currently 
available zero-emission technologies as well as consider allowances, 
such as longer project timeframes, for specific technologies.

DATES: Comments must be received on or before June 5, 2023, to allow 
for their consideration during development of these funding programs. 
EPA may consider comments received after the due date to the extent 
practicable.

ADDRESSES: You may submit your comments, identified by Docket ID No. 
EPA-HQ-OAR-2023-0216, by any of the following methods:
    <bullet> Federal eRulemaking Portal: Go to <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a> and follow the online instructions for submitting 
comments;
    <bullet> Mail: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA Docket 
Center, OAR Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2023-0216, Mail Code 28221T, 1200 
Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460;
    <bullet> Hand Delivery or Courier: EPA Docket Center, WJC West 
Building, Room 3334, 1301 Constitution Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20004. 
The Docket Center's hours of operation are 8:30 a.m.-4:30 p.m. EST., 
Monday through Friday, except Federal holidays.
    Instructions: All submissions received must include the Docket ID 
No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2023-0216. Comments received may be posted without 
change to <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a>, including any personal 
information provided.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Dennis Johnson, Manager, Technology 
Assessment Branch, (202) 343-9278, or via email at 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#ea80858284998584c48e8f84848399aa8f9a8bc48d859c"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="cba1a4a3a5b8a4a5e5afaea5a5a2b88baebbaae5aca4bd">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>. U.S. EPA, Room: WJC-North 5512DD,

[[Page 29667]]

Mail Code: 6406A, 1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460. 
Office hours are from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. EST Monday through Friday, 
except Federal holidays.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: In this RFI, the Agency provides a brief 
background on the Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicle and Clean Ports Programs 
under the IRA, background information on BABA provisions, and then 
describes five areas of interest. The RFI then requests comments and 
responses to specific topics in each of these areas of interest. This 
RFI also includes guidance on submitting comments, procedures for 
submitting confidential business information as well as where to find 
additional information.

Responding to This RFI

    Please indicate in your written comments the topic number(s) below 
you are commenting on and provide specific examples or information to 
illustrate your comments where possible. Please follow the instructions 
on <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a> and the docket website for submitting 
comments, but do not submit electronically any information you consider 
to be Confidential Business Information (CBI) or other information 
whose disclosure is restricted by statute as there are separate 
instructions below for submitting CBI. Once submitted, comments cannot 
be edited or removed from the docket. You do not need to address every 
topic and should focus on those where you have relevant expertise or 
experience. The EPA may publish any comment received to its public 
docket or to <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a> without change, including any 
personal information provided. Multimedia submissions (audio, video, 
etc.) must be accompanied by a written comment. The written comment is 
considered the official comment and should include discussion of all 
points you wish to make. In all cases, to the extent possible, please 
cite any public data related to or that support your responses. If data 
are available, but non-public, describe such data to the extent 
permissible. EPA will generally not consider comments or comment 
contents located outside of the primary submission (i.e., on the web, 
cloud, or other file sharing system).

Confidential Business Information

    Confidential Business Information (CBI) is commercial or financial 
information that is both customarily and actually treated as private by 
its owner. Under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) (5 U.S.C. 552), 
CBI is exempt from public disclosure. If your comments responsive to 
this RFI contain commercial or financial information that is 
customarily treated as private, that you actually treat as private, and 
that is relevant or responsive to this RFI, it is important that you 
clearly designate the submitted comments as CBI. Pursuant to 40 CFR 
part 2, you may ask EPA to give confidential treatment to information 
you give to the Agency by taking the following steps: (1) Mark each 
page of the original document submission containing CBI as 
``Confidential''; (2) send EPA, along with the original document, a 
second copy of the original document with the CBI deleted; and (3) 
explain why the information you are submitting is CBI. Unless you are 
notified otherwise, EPA will treat such marked submissions as 
confidential under the FOIA, and they will not be placed in the public 
docket of this RFI. Submissions containing CBI should be sent to Dennis 
Johnson, Manager, Technology Assessment Branch, via email at 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#97fdf8fff9e4f8f9b9f3f2f9f9fee4d7f2e7f6b9f0f8e1"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="38525750564b5756165c5d5656514b785d4859165f574e">[email&#160;protected]</span></a> or to Dennis Johnson, U.S. EPA, Room: WJC North 
5512DD, Mail Code: 6406A, 1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 
20460. Any comment submissions that EPA receives that are not 
specifically designated as CBI will be placed in the public docket for 
this matter.

Background

    In this section the Agency provides background information on two 
programs in the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA). The IRA enacted as 
Public Law 117-169 (August 16, 2022), includes important new programs 
to address climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and to 
improve air quality through use of zero-emission vehicles and 
equipment. Among these programs is a (1) Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicles 
Program, and (2) Grants to Reduce Air Pollution at Ports Program. These 
programs provide funding that EPA will distribute to eligible 
recipients.
    The Clean Heavy-Duty Vehicles (HDV) Program directs the 
Administrator to make awards of grants and rebates to eligible 
recipients and to make contracts to eligible contractors for providing 
rebates ($1 billion total). Eligible recipients include states, 
municipalities, Indian Tribes, or nonprofit school transportation 
associations. Eligible contractor means a contractor that has the 
capacity; (A) to sell, lease, license, or contract for service zero-
emission vehicles, or charging or other equipment needed to charge, 
fuel, or maintain zero-emission vehicles, or to contract for service an 
eligible vehicle, or (B) to arrange financing for such a sale, lease, 
license, or contract for service. Funding can be for up to 100% of the 
costs for (1) the incremental costs of replacing an eligible class 6 or 
7 heavy-duty vehicle with a zero-emission vehicle (2) purchasing, 
installing, operating and maintaining infrastructure needed to charge, 
fuel or maintain zero-emission vehicles; (3) workforce development and 
training to support the maintenance, charging, fueling and operation of 
zero-emission vehicles; and (4) planning and technical activities to 
support the adoption and deployment of zero-emission vehicles.
    The Grants to Reduce Air Pollution at Ports Program (hereafter 
``Clean Ports Program'') provides the Administrator funding to award 
rebates and grants to eligible recipients on a competitive basis ($3 
billion total). Rebate and grant funding may be used: (A) to purchase 
or install zero-emission port equipment or technology for use at or to 
directly serve, one or more ports; (B) to conduct any relevant planning 
or permitting in connection with the purchase or installation of such 
zero-emission port equipment or technology; and (C) to develop 
qualified climate action plans. Eligible recipients include: (A) a port 
authority; (B) a state, regional, local or Tribal Agency that has 
jurisdiction over a port authority or a port; (C) an air pollution 
control agency; or (D) a private entity that (i) applies for a grant in 
partnership with an entity described in (A) through (C) and (ii) and 
owns, operates, or uses the facilities, cargo-handling equipment, 
transportation equipment or related technology of a port. Zero-emission 
port equipment or technology means a human-operated equipment or human-
maintained technology that; (A) produces zero emissions of any air 
pollutant or any greenhouse gas other than water vapor; or (B) captures 
100 percent of the emissions produced by an ocean-going vessel at 
berth.
    Zero-emission vehicles and equipment are increasingly being offered 
for sale in the commercial truck and ports markets. Current options 
include vehicles powered by electricity and hydrogen. The Agency is 
aware of many of these product offerings. However, given the wide range 
of potential vehicles and equipment that could be considered for 
funding under the Clean HDV and Clean Ports Programs, EPA believes it 
is critical to provide an opportunity for all stakeholders (e.g., 
manufacturers, distributors, installers, fleet operators, port 
operators) to share information about their products and firsthand 
experience with zero-emission technologies if they so choose, in order

[[Page 29668]]

to give EPA the broadest understanding possible of potential vehicles 
and equipment eligible to fund.
    Charging and Fueling Infrastructure: Through the Clean HDV and 
Clean Ports programs, EPA may fund charging and other fueling 
infrastructure as an eligible expense in supporting zero-emission 
heavy-duty vehicle and port equipment projects. To this end, the Agency 
seeks information on the manufacturing and assembly of electric 
charging and other fueling infrastructure for zero-emission commercial 
vehicles and port equipment, such as whether zero-emissions fueling 
infrastructure manufactured in the United States can comply with 
applicable BABA requirements. This RFI is intended to: (A) help EPA 
better understand whether and to what extent domestic sourcing is 
available now, or may be possible in the near future, for electric 
charging and other fueling equipment and components; (B) ensure 
domestic manufacturers have the opportunity to identify any electric 
vehicle (EV) charger and fueling equipment meeting applicable BABA 
requirements; (C) ensure domestic manufacturers have the opportunity to 
identify any electric charging and other fueling equipment that could 
meet a domestic final assembly condition, and identify the portion of 
components that could meet a domestic manufacturing requirements; and 
(D) highlight benefits of shifting manufacturing processes to the 
United States.
    Through this RFI, EPA seeks information regarding the availability 
of zero-emission heavy-duty vehicle and port equipment, electric 
chargers and fueling equipment, such as for hydrogen, that is 
manufactured and/or assembled in the United States, including whether 
they comply with applicable BABA requirements. EPA is not aware of any 
zero-emission heavy-duty vehicle or port equipment electric chargers or 
fueling equipment that currently meets applicable BABA requirements for 
steel and iron or manufactured products. The Agency is interested in 
promptly obtaining more information on this issue and others discussed 
in this notice to assess if sufficient quantities of equipment are 
currently available to comply with BABA requirements or whether 
sufficient equipment would be available in the near future.

Build America Buy America Act

    In January 2021, the President issued Executive Order (E.O.) 14005, 
titled ``Ensuring the Future is Made in All of America by All of 
America's Workers.'' 86 FR 7475 (Jan. 28, 2021). E.O. 14005 states that 
the United States Government ``should, consistent with applicable law, 
use terms and conditions of Federal financial assistance awards and 
Federal procurements to maximize the use of goods, products, and 
materials produced in, and services offered in, the United States.'' 
The EPA is committed to ensuring strong and effective Buy America 
implementation consistent with E.O. 14005. At the same time, the EPA 
must also consider how to ensure that electric chargers and fueling 
equipment, such as for hydrogen, are widely available in the immediate 
future to implement EPA-funded projects throughout the United States 
and its territories in a timely and cost-effective manner.
    On November 15, 2021, President Biden signed into law the 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (``IIJA''), Public Law 117-58, 
which includes the Build America, Buy America (BABA) Act. Public Law 
117-58, sections 70901-52. The Act strengthens Made in America Laws and 
will bolster America's industrial base, protect national security, and 
support high-paying jobs. The Act requires that the head of each 
covered Federal agency ensure that ``none of the funds made available 
for a Federal financial assistance program for infrastructure, 
including each deficient program, may be obligated for a project unless 
all of the iron, steel, manufactured products, and construction 
materials used in the project are produced in the United States'' 
(Build America, Buy America (BABA) Act, Pub. L. 117-58, Sections 70911-
70917), unless a waiver is granted.\1\ This means that the manufactured 
product was manufactured in the United States, and the cost of the 
components of the manufactured product that are mined, produced, or 
manufactured in the United States is greater than 55 percent of the 
total cost of all components of the manufactured product, unless 
another standard for determining the minimum amount of domestic content 
of the manufactured product has been established under applicable law 
or regulation. IIJA section 70912(6)(B). For all steel or iron 
materials used in infrastructure projects that involve the obligation 
of federal financial assistance, manufacturing processes, including 
application of a coating, must occur in the United States. Coating 
includes all processes which protect or enhance the value of the 
material to which the coating is applied. Such projects involve both 
the acquisition and installation of such equipment. These requirements 
apply to the obligation of all federal financial assistance for 
infrastructure projects, including IRA funds. EPA is committed to 
ensuring strong and effective Buy America implementation consistent 
with E.O. 14005. In implementing the IRA Clean HDV and Ports Programs, 
EPA will ensure compliance with BABA requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ OMB M-22-11, <a href="https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/M-22-11.pdf">https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/M-22-11.pdf</a>.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Request for Comments and Information

    In this section, the Agency describes general areas of interest to 
be addressed in these topics. To inform development of the Clean HDV 
and Clean Ports Programs, EPA requests comments and information from 
the public on the following five areas of interest:
    A. Technology Availability and Market-Readiness: EPA recognizes 
that some zero-emission heavy-duty trucks are currently being marketed 
for sale. Consequently, EPA requests current and expected near term 
(within 1, 2, and 3 years) availability of potentially eligible zero-
emission class 6 (gross vehicle weight rating 19,501-26,000 pounds) and 
class 7 (GVWR 26,001-33,000 pounds) vehicles, such as refuse haulers, 
day cab tractors, cargo vans, school buses, and straight trucks. 
Additionally, EPA is seeking responses to these same questions with 
respect to commercial trucks that may be used at ports, such as zero-
emission service trucks and class 7 and 8 (GVWR >33,000 pounds) dray 
trucks. EPA requests responses to the questions regarding the current 
state of zero-emission port equipment and related fuel infrastructure 
availability, including commercial readiness and production volumes, 
for near-term as current capabilities, as well as in the 1-, 2-, 3- and 
5-year timeframes.
    B. Performance: EPA requests information regarding current and 
expected near-term characteristics of zero-emissions heavy-duty 
vehicles (1 to 3 years) and port equipment (1 to 5 years) and related 
fueling with regards to performance, reliability, and durability, 
including standard and optional warranty information, and descriptions 
of performance comparing the zero-emission truck or equipment to those 
operating on conventional petroleum-based liquid fuels.
    C. Pricing: EPA requests information regarding current and expected 
near-term market prices of zero-emission heavy-duty vehicles (1 to 3 
years), port equipment (1 to 5 years) and related fueling 
infrastructure, as well as the incremental costs relative to those

[[Page 29669]]

operating on conventional petroleum-based liquid fuels.
    D. Domestic Materials Sourcing and Manufacturing: EPA requests 
information regarding the extent to which materials are sourced from 
the U.S. and if manufacturing occurs in the U.S. to comply with BABA 
requirements currently, or in the near-term, especially with respect to 
electric charging and other fueling equipment.
    E. Other Practical Considerations: EPA requests information that 
can inform implementation of zero-emission heavy-duty vehicle, port 
equipment, and related charging/fueling infrastructure projects. Please 
provide information such as necessary training, maintenance facility 
modifications, required safety equipment and the availability of 
hydrogen from different sources that produce zero-emissions.

Topics for Areas of Interest

    In this section, the Agency requests responses to specific topics. 
Please indicate in your written comments the topic number(s) you are 
commenting on and provide specific examples or information to 
illustrate your comments where possible.

Topics

A. Technology Availability and Market-Readiness
    1. Using the following categories as a guide, please identify 
specific types of vehicles or equipment that you are providing 
information about in response to this RFI. For each item you identify, 
please provide a description, and specify the type of powertrain (e.g., 
electric [non-battery], battery-electric, hydrogen fuel cell electric, 
or other zero-emissions technologies).
    a. Zero-emissions class 6 and 7 vehicles: including but not limited 
to school buses, refuse trucks, utility trucks, box trucks, cargo vans, 
and day cab tractors.
    b. Zero-emission port equipment: including but not limited to port 
dray trucks, cargo handling equipment, yard tractors, locomotives, 
railcar movers, harbor craft, shore power, and technologies to capture 
100 percent of emissions produced by an ocean-going vessel at berth.
    c. Zero-emissions fueling infrastructure: including but not limited 
to heavy-duty electric vehicle, equipment, and locomotive chargers, as 
well as hydrogen refueling infrastructure.
    2. For each of the items you identified in response to Topic 1, 
please:
    a. Describe the current and the expected availability of the 
equipment based on sales volumes, number and size of manufacturers, and 
other key industry factors.
    b. Provide information on the near-term demand outlook for this 
equipment. For entities that are eligible for funding, please describe 
how many and what types of zero-emission heavy-duty vehicles and port 
technologies you anticipate purchasing in the near-term.
    c. Provide information regarding whether the current and expected 
near-term manufacturing capacity would be adequate to meet the expected 
market demand, including anticipated federal funding. Please specify 
any factors helping or preventing the industry from meeting the 
expected demand today and in the near-term and provide information on 
the availability of and materials used in key components such as 
batteries, electric motors, high-voltage cables, storage tanks, pumps, 
hoses, nozzles, enclosures, and required safety equipment.
    d. Provide information on whether various duty cycles affect 
available power levels at the installation site and dwell times needed 
for charging, whether charging is anticipated to happen on site or en 
route, and how expected needs for zero-emission heavy-duty vehicles and 
zero-emission port equipment might differ from what is commercially 
available today and in the near-term timeframes.
    e. Please indicate to what extent it is human-operated equipment 
and/or a human-maintained technology.
    f. Provide information on the current and expected near-term 
average customer delivery time.
    3. For each of the items you identified in response to Topic 1.c., 
please describe the current and expected availability or unavailability 
of components, such as, electrical plugs, transformers, electrical 
switchgear, hydrogen storage tanks, pumps, hoses, nozzles, enclosures, 
and required safety equipment.
    4. For each of the battery-electric and charger items you 
identified in response to Topic 1, please describe the standard and 
optional equipment specifications. Please specify the type of charging 
included, e.g. whether it uses the SAE J1772 connector for AC charging 
(also known as the Jplug), if it provides DC Fast Charging, if it uses 
the Combine Charging System (CCS) connector, if it uses the CHAdeMO 
connector, if it uses the Megawatt Charging System (MCS), and or 
whether it uses an additional connector technology and what type, 
whether it uses inductive charging, and other relevant information such 
as maximum power rating (kW) and standards to which the equipment is 
certified.
    5. For each of the battery-electric items you identified in 
response to Topic 1, please describe whether and how the batteries can 
be upgraded or replaced.
B. Performance
    6. For each item you identified in response to Topic 1, please:
    a. Describe the expected service life and long-term operation and 
maintenance requirements relative to those operating on conventional 
petroleum-based liquid fuels.
    b. Describe charging or fueling requirements. Potential items to 
consider include: connections to the electric grid, including electric 
distribution upgrades; vehicle-to-grid integration, including smart 
charge management, bi-directional charging or other protocols that can 
minimize impacts to the grid, alignment with electric distribution 
interconnection processes; potentially unique charging systems (such as 
for vessels or locomotives), multi-use charging stations to charge 
different types of equipment, potential to charge multiple systems 
concurrently; on-site energy storage; and potential use of renewable 
energy sources to power charging, energy storage and/or hydrogen 
production.
    c. Describe the original manufacturer's warranty. Please include 
all applicable parameters, such as years, hours or miles of operation, 
and number of charging cycles and as well as whether the warranty 
covers the damage from any potential charger malfunction.
    d. Describe differences in performance and operational 
characteristics between the zero-emission HDV or port equipment and the 
comparable conventionally fueled counterpart. Please fully explain all 
differences in capacity, speed, operating range, impacts on operation 
due to ambient conditions or limitations in capabilities.
    7. For each of the battery-electric items you identified in 
response to Topic 1, please:
    a. Identify all charger manufacturers or charger models with which 
this item has been verified to have full technology compatibility or 
other EV charging standards and how compliance was demonstrated. Please 
provide information on how the technology compatibility was verified.
    b. Please describe what type of safety mechanisms are used to 
protect battery packs from water intrusion, corrosion due to flooding 
and salt, thermal runaway events, and/or other hazards.

[[Page 29670]]

C. Pricing
    8. For each of the items you identified in response to Topic 1, 
please:
    a. Specify the current market price (or price range) and what is 
included in that price. For example, in the case of chargers, please 
specify whether it is for a complete charger pedestal, power equipment 
and associated electrical system capable of charging one or more 
vehicles. Please also specify if additional costs for installation and 
commissioning are included.
    b. Provide information on the price outlook through calendar year, 
and, where applicable, through the near-term future. Please identify 
and describe any opportunities for reducing prices.
    c. Please also discuss the incremental and lifecycle costs as well 
as the payback period relative to similar equipment or vehicles 
operating on conventional petroleum-based liquid fuels. In addition to 
the total cost, where possible, please provide cost information 
itemized by category (for example: purchase of vehicles or equipment, 
installation, maintenance, fuel/charging, insurance, other operating 
expenses) and include the key assumptions used to estimate them.
    d. Please identify and describe any opportunities for reducing 
prices of zero-emision technologies.
    e. Provide information regarding global supply chain constraints, 
local permitting, safety requirements and needs that may increase 
costs, impact delivery timeframes, or extend installation time.
    9. EPA is interested in better understanding the current lifetime 
costs/Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) gap between electric and diesel 
school buses as well as how that gap is expected to change over time. 
For each of the TCO cost categories (a-c) listed here, please provide 
cost estimates using the following parameters: a period of analysis of 
10 years; a fleet size of 50 buses; and a 5-year straight line 
depreciation schedule (please clearly state what alternative 
assumptions have been made). Also, please clearly state what 
assumptions have been made on geographic region of analysis and/or 
specific districts; average vehicle life expectancy; sales tax; and 
annual days of operation. To the extent other HD vehicle types, such as 
dray trucks, can address the TCO in this fashion, please provide a 
similar description for those vehicle types.
    a. Capital cost (CAPEX) categories: Vehicle, charging/fueling 
infrastructure, residual value.
    b. Operating cost (OPEX) categories; Operating expense, fuel/
electricity, insurance, registration.
    c. Other (please specify).
D. Domestic Materials Sourcing and Manufacturing
    10. For each of the applicable items you identified in response to 
Topic 1, please specify whether the product meets BABA requirements or 
is currently manufactured in the United States to meet a domestic final 
assembly condition. (Yes or No)
    11. If you answered ``Yes'' to Topic 10:
    a. Please identify all manufacturers that can either meet BABA 
requirements or can currently manufacture equipment in the United 
States.. For those that meet the condition of manufactured in the 
United States, but do not meet the domestic content requirement, please 
identify the percentage of components manufactured in the United States 
as calculated by cost of components (if known).
    b. How many of each equipment type meeting BABA requirements or 
manufactured in the United States conditions can be manufactured per 
year during the next 5 years?
    c. What portion of the total market supply for each equipment type 
do you estimate to be BABA compliant?
    d. What is the typical cost for the steel and iron used in this 
equipment type?
    e. What percent of the total cost is typically represented by the 
steel and iron used to manufacture this equipment type? If you cannot 
provide the percent, please describe if it is more or less than 50% of 
the total cost.
    f. Can the origins of the steel and iron used in this equipment 
type be certified by documentation? If so, how?
    12. If you answered ``No'' to Topic 10:
    a. What steps can manufacturers take to increase equipment that 
meets BABA requirements?
    b. What additional support is needed ensure a sufficient supply of 
equipment that meets BABA requirements?
    c. How long might it take to undertake those steps?
    d. What is the volume of equipment that could be shifted to 
manufacture in compliance with BABA requirements?
    e. Can that volume be ramped up over time, and if so at what annual 
growth rate?
    13. For available zero-emission technologies, please describe any 
differences between domestically manufactured or assembled and non-
domestic equipment. Please address any differences in supply 
availability, price, replacement part delivery, functionality, 
security, etc.
E. Other Practical Considerations for Program Design
    14. For each of the items you identified in response to Topic 1, 
please provide examples of best practices relating to project 
development, installation, and adoption of zero-emissions equipment and 
related electric, hydrogen, or other fueling infrastructure you 
identified in response to Topic 1.
    15. For each of the fueling infrastructure types you identified in 
response to Question 1, please provide examples of the phases and time 
required for planning, permitting, sourcing, delivering, and installing 
this equipment.
    16. Please identify any unique factors for states, municipalities, 
utilities, ports authorities, Indian Tribes, or nonattainment areas to 
consider in developing zero-emission projects including necessary 
charging or other fueling infrastructure.
    17. If known, please describe opportunities and best practices to:
    a. Maximize environmental benefits such as replacing the oldest, 
highest use, highest emitting equipment with available zero emission 
technologies.
    b. Maximize benefits with technologies to service one or more ports 
and intermodal facilities to potentially share or coordinate charging/
fueling infrastructure.
    c. Leverage or improve zero-emission transport corridors.
    d. Maximize benefits for workforce development and jobs training 
outcomes.
    e. Maximize benefits for disadvantaged communities and/or advancing 
other environmental justice objectives.
    18. Please describe what specialized workforce expertise, including 
key occupations, is needed to support the installation, use, and 
maintenance of (1) clean heavy-duty vehicles, and (2) zero-emission 
port equipment. What (if any) challenges do you anticipate in meeting 
your expertise and capacity needs? How can these challenges be 
effectively addressed?

    May 3, 2023.
Sarah Dunham,
Director, Office of Transportation and Air Quality.
[FR Doc. 2023-09802 Filed 5-5-23; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6560-50-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>