<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 82 Issue 126 (Monday, July 3, 2017)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 82, Number 126 (Monday, July 3, 2017)]
[Notices]
[Pages 30886-30892]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2017-13998]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Bureau of Ocean Energy Management

[BOEM 2017-0050]


Request for Information and Comments on the Preparation of the 
2019-2024 National Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Program 
MAA104000

AGENCY: Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Interior.

ACTION: Request for information and comments.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) is soliciting 
information and requesting comments on the preparation of a new five-
year National Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Program 
(National OCS Program) for 2019-2024 pursuant to the Outer Continental 
Shelf (OCS) Lands Act. Upon completion, the National OCS Program for 
2019-2024 will replace the National OCS Program for 2017-2022 (2017-
2022 Program), which was approved on January 17, 2017, and will succeed 
the National OCS Program for 2012-2017 on July 1, 2017.

DATES: BOEM must receive all comments and information by August 17, 
2017.

ADDRESSES: Submit comments and information via the Federal internet 
commenting system at <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a> by following the 
instructions in the ``Public Comment Procedure'' section of this 
notice. Mail comments and information, including all privileged or 
proprietary information, by U.S. mail to Ms. Kelly Hammerle, National 
Program Manager, BOEM, 45600 Woodland Road, Mailstop VAM-LD, Sterling, 
VA 20166.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Ms. Kelly Hammerle, National Program 
Manager, at (703) 787-1613 or by email at [add email address].

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) Lands Act, 
43 U.S.C. 1331 et seq., declares that it is the policy of the United 
States that the OCS, as ``a vital national resource reserve,'' should 
be available for ``expeditious and orderly development, subject to 
environmental safeguards'' and consistent with maintaining competition 
and other national needs. 43 U.S.C. 1333(3). Section 18 of the OCS 
Lands Act, 43 U.S.C. 1344, requires the Department of the Interior 
(DOI) to invite and solicit information from interested and affected 
parties during the preparation of a National OCS Program. The 2017-2022 
Program was approved on January 17, 2017, and will succeed the 2012-
2017 Program on July 1, 2017. BOEM is soliciting information on the 
preparation of a new National OCS Program for 2019-2024 to, upon 
completion, replace the 2017-2022 Program.
    Section 18 of the OCS Lands Act requires the Secretary of the 
Interior (Secretary) to prepare and periodically revise and maintain an 
oil and gas leasing program to implement the Act's policies. The 
program must contain a schedule of proposed lease sales (including as 
precisely as possible, the size, timing, and location of leasing 
activity) which the Secretary determines ``will best meet national 
energy needs for the five year period following its approval. . . .'' 
Section 18 also requires the completion of a multi-step process of 
public consultation and analysis before the Secretary may approve a new 
National OCS Program. The process includes the following steps: (1) 
Issuance of a Request for Information and Comments (RFI); (2) 
development of a Draft Proposed Program (DPP), (3) development of a 
Proposed Program, (4) development of a Proposed Final Program (PFP); 
and (5) Secretarial approval of the Program. Following this RFI, the 
public will have additional opportunities to comment on both the DPP 
and the Proposed Program documents.
    This RFI requests comments on all 26 OCS Planning Areas, including 
the areas that are restricted from leasing by Presidential withdrawal 
or Congressional moratorium, as discussed below. BOEM requests 
information and comments from States, local and tribal governments, 
Native American and Native Alaskan organizations, Federal agencies, 
environmental and other public interest organizations, the oil and gas 
industry, non-energy industries, other interested organizations and 
entities, and the general public, for use in the preparation of the 
2019-2024 National OCS Program. BOEM is seeking a wide array of 
information, including, but not limited to, information associated with 
the economic, social, and environmental values of all OCS resources, as 
well as the potential impact of oil and gas exploration and development 
on other OCS resources, and on the marine, coastal and human 
environments.

[[Page 30887]]

    The National OCS Program sets forth the proposed schedule of lease 
sales for the subsequent five-year period, and enables the Federal 
Government, States, industry, and other interested parties to begin 
planning for the later steps in the leasing process. The Secretary 
decides whether to proceed with each specific lease sale on the 
schedule included in an approved National OCS Program only after 
meeting all the requirements of the OCS Lands Act and other applicable 
statutes.
    The initiation of a new National OCS Program development process at 
this time is a key aspect of the implementation of President Donald J. 
Trump's America-First Offshore Energy Strategy, as outlined in 
Executive Order (E.O.) 13795 of April 28, 2017 (82 FR 20815, May 3, 
2017), and Secretary's Order 3350 of May 1, 2017, issued by Secretary 
of the Interior Ryan K. Zinke. Section 2 of E.O. 13795 states that it 
is United States policy to encourage energy exploration and production, 
including on the OCS, to maintain the Nation's global energy leadership 
and ``foster energy security and resilience for the benefit of the 
American people, while ensuring that any such activity is safe and 
environmentally responsible.'' Secretary's Order 3350 calls for 
enhancing opportunities for energy exploration, leasing, and 
development of the OCS, establishing regulatory certainty for OCS 
activities, and enhancing conservation stewardship, thereby providing 
jobs, energy security, and revenue for the American people. As required 
by E.O. 13795, DOI will cooperate as appropriate and consistent with 
applicable law with the Department of Defense (DOD) and the Department 
of Commerce on a number of issues, including issues pertaining to this 
National OCS Program development process.
    The OCS is a significant source of oil and gas to the Nation's 
energy supply. As of May 2017, BOEM administered over 3,000 active oil 
and gas leases covering 16 million OCS acres. Production from these 
leases generates billions of dollars in revenue for the Federal 
Treasury and State governments, while supporting hundreds of thousands 
of jobs. In fiscal year 2016, oil and gas leases on the OCS accounted 
for approximately 18 percent of domestic oil production and 4 percent 
of domestic natural gas production. The offshore areas of the United 
States also are estimated to contain significant quantities of 
resources in yet-to-be-discovered fields. In its 2016 National 
Assessment (<a href="https://www.boem.gov/National-Assessment-2016">https://www.boem.gov/National-Assessment-2016</a>), BOEM 
reported that the mean estimate of undiscovered, technically 
recoverable oil and gas resources in the U.S. OCS consist of 89.87 
billion barrels of oil and 327.49 trillion cubic feet of natural gas.

Gulf of Mexico (GOM)

    In March 2017, BOEM held the last of 12 lease sales in the GOM 
scheduled in the 2012-2017 Program. That Program included annual sales 
in the Central and Western GOM and two sales in the portion of the 
Eastern GOM not subject to the Congressional moratorium pursuant to the 
Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act (GOMESA). These sales have generated 
approximately $3.4 billion in high bids.
    Lease Sale 248 in the Western GOM was held on August 24, 2016. 
Pursuant to this sale, BOEM awarded 24 leases to the 3 companies that 
submitted bids, totaling over $18 million in high bids. Lease Sale 247 
in the Central GOM was held on March 22, 2017. The sale generated 
almost $275 million in high bids for 163 blocks by 28 companies. Lease 
Sale 226, held on March 23, 2016, offered for lease all available 
unleased acreage in the Eastern GOM, except for those whole and partial 
OCS blocks deferred by the GOMESA. No bids were received for Sale 226.
    BOEM is also moving forward in the prelease sale process for the 
early sales scheduled in the recently approved 2017-2022 Program, which 
is effective July 1, 2017, and includes ten region-wide lease sales in 
the area of the GOM not under Congressional moratorium or otherwise 
unavailable for leasing. For more information on the lease sale 
schedule, visit: <a href="http://www.boem.gov/Oil-and-Gas-Energy-Program/Leasing/Five-Year-Program/Lease-Sale-Schedule/2012-2017-Lease-Sale-Schedule.aspx">http://www.boem.gov/Oil-and-Gas-Energy-Program/Leasing/Five-Year-Program/Lease-Sale-Schedule/2012-2017-Lease-Sale-Schedule.aspx</a>. These scheduled lease sales will not be impacted by the 
preparation of the 2019-2024 National Outer Continental Shelf Oil and 
Gas Leasing Program.

Alaska

    The last sale in the 2012-2017 Program is scheduled for June 21, 
2017, in the northern portion of the Cook Inlet Planning Area offshore 
Alaska. The 2017-2022 Program also schedules a sale in the northern 
portion of the Cook Inlet Planning Area in 2021. Prelease sale steps 
will begin in the next year.
    The Arctic holds substantial oil and gas potential. In 2016, BOEM 
estimated Undiscovered Technically Recoverable Oil and Gas Resources 
(UTRR) in the Chukchi Sea Planning Area to be 29 billion barrels of oil 
equivalent (BBOE) and in the Beaufort Sea Planning Area to be 13 BBOE. 
The 2016 National Assessment for all OCS areas is available at <a href="https://www.boem.gov/National-Assessment-2016/">https://www.boem.gov/National-Assessment-2016/</a>. No sales are scheduled in the 
Arctic in the 2017-2022 Program.

Atlantic

    Data suggests that portions of the Atlantic OCS may contain 
significant oil and gas resource potential (see 2016 National 
Assessment cited above); however, current geological and geophysical 
(G&G) information regarding that potential is based on data collected 
in the 1970s and early 1980s. Tremendous advances in instrumentation 
and technology for the acquisition and analysis of G&G data have been 
made in the intervening decades.
    In recognition of these advances in G&G data acquisition technology 
and the need to better understand the scope of existing resources, BOEM 
published, on July 23, 2014 (79 FR 42815), a Record of Decision for the 
Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement for Atlantic G&G 
activities, which established a path forward for G&G activities off the 
Mid- and South Atlantic coast. BOEM is currently evaluating several G&G 
permit applications. With the initiation of a new Program development 
process and, with it, the renewed potential for a lease sale in the 
Atlantic region, BOEM may receive new G&G permit applications in the 
near future. The last lease sale held in the Atlantic OCS was in 1983.

Pacific Region

    The four planning areas off the Pacific coast were not included for 
potential leasing in the 2017-2022 Program. Eleven OCS oil and gas 
lease sales were held in the Pacific Region between 1963 and 1984. A 
total of 470 leases were issued in the 11 sales. Today, there are 43 
producing leases and 23 oil and gas platforms, all offshore southern 
California. In Fiscal Year 2016, production from these leases generated 
$31.2 million in revenue to the federal treasury from a total of $234 
million in sales value from crude oil and natural gas. As a result of 
Congressional moratoria, subsequent presidential action, and consistent 
and united opposition by the States of Washington, Oregon, and 
California to any activity off their coasts, the Pacific OCS has not 
been included in any National OCS Program since the 1987-1992 Program.

Areas Made Unavailable by Congressional or Presidential Action

    With the enactment of GOMESA, Congress placed off-limits to OCS oil 
and gas leasing activities, through June

[[Page 30888]]

30, 2022, the Eastern Gulf of Mexico within 125 miles of Florida; all 
of the Eastern Gulf of Mexico east of 86 degrees, 41 minutes West 
longitude; and a portion of the Central Gulf of Mexico within 100 miles 
of Florida (see Figure 2).
    The North Aleutian Basin Planning Area in Alaska was withdrawn from 
future leasing consideration for a time period without specific 
expiration by President Barack Obama on December 16, 2014, pursuant to 
section 12(a) of the OCS Lands Act, 43 U.S.C. 1341(a).
    All National Marine Sanctuaries were withdrawn from leasing, for a 
time period without a specific expiration, by President William J. 
Clinton on June 12, 1998. Pursuant to E.O. 13795, President Trump 
withdrew marine sanctuaries that were designated as of July 14, 2008, 
from disposition by leasing. On September 15, 2016, President Obama 
designated the first marine national monument in the Atlantic Ocean off 
the coast of New England as the Northeast Canyons and Seamounts Marine 
National Monument, prohibiting exploring for, developing, or producing 
oil and gas or minerals, or undertaking any other energy exploration or 
development activities within the monument.
    In the DPP, BOEM will analyze all 26 OCS Planning Areas, including 
areas that may be currently unavailable for leasing. An area that is 
currently unavailable for leasing could still be part of a National OCS 
Program, but could not be offered for sale until Congress and/or the 
President, as applicable, makes it available.

National Energy Needs

    Section 18 of the OCS Lands Act requires that the Secretary 
consider national energy needs in formulating the National OCS Program. 
In developing the National OCS Program, BOEM will present an analysis 
of the contribution of OCS oil and natural gas to the U.S. economy and 
the Nation's anticipated energy needs. The analysis will include 
discussions of the U.S. Energy Information Administration's projections 
of national energy needs in the Annual Energy Outlook, the potential 
contribution of OCS oil and natural gas production in meeting those 
needs, alternative sources to OCS production, and considerations 
relating to national and regional energy markets. BOEM invites comments 
from anyone who would like to submit information related to the 
Nation's future energy needs or national and regional energy markets 
for consideration in determining the appropriate size, timing, and 
location of OCS oil and gas lease sales for the new National OCS 
Program.

OCS Planning Areas To Be Considered and Analyzed

    Section 18 of the OCS Lands Act requires that the National OCS 
Program be based upon a consideration of a comparative analysis of the 
oil- and gas-bearing regions of the OCS. BOEM has divided the OCS into 
26 Planning Areas, which are depicted in Figures 1 and 2. The depicted 
maritime boundaries and limits, as well as divisions between planning 
areas, where shown, are for planning and administrative purposes only. 
Note that precise maritime boundaries between the United States and 
nearby or adjacent nations have not been determined in all cases. These 
depictions do not affect or prejudice in any manner the position of the 
United States, or its individual States, with respect to the nature or 
extent of internal waters or of sovereign rights or jurisdiction.
    This RFI requests information on all 26 planning areas, including 
areas currently under moratorium, withdrawn, or otherwise unavailable. 
As set forth in more detail later in this RFI, the information 
requested is wide-ranging, including information on other uses of the 
sea, marine productivity, and environmental sensitivity. Accordingly, 
this RFI invites and provides an opportunity for Governors of affected 
States, local government, industry, Federal agencies, and the general 
public to provide suggestions and any other information they believe 
BOEM should evaluate for purposes of the 2019-2024 Program.
    The information solicited in this RFI will be considered in light 
of the factors specified by section 18 of the OCS Lands Act, which are 
discussed later herein. Based upon consideration of the analysis of 
those factors, the Secretary will prepare the DPP and decide which 
areas to include therein. Pursuant to section 18 of the OCS Lands Act, 
areas included in the DPP decision will be subject to further analysis.

Section 18 of the OCS Lands Act

    As previously noted, the National OCS Program preparation process 
will follow all the procedural and substantive requirements of section 
18 of the OCS Lands Act. This RFI solicits information and comments 
early in the preparation process pursuant to section 18(c)(1) of the 
OCS Lands Act, 43 U.S.C. 1344(c)(1). BOEM will prepare a DPP decision 
document based upon consideration of the information and comments 
received and analysis of the principles and factors specified in 
section 18 of the OCS Lands Act. The DPP decision document will present 
for review and comment a preliminary schedule of proposed lease sales 
and potential decision options.
    Section 18 of the OCS Lands Act provides that, for purposes of 
preparing a National OCS Program, the Secretary should take into 
consideration the economic, social, and environmental values of all OCS 
resources, as well as the potential impact of oil and gas exploration 
and development on other resource values of the OCS and the marine, 
coastal and human environments. The eight factors that must be 
considered in determining the timing and location of leasing under the 
National OCS Program are set forth in section 18(a)(2) of the OCS Lands 
act, 43 U.S.C. 1344(a)(2). They are (1) existing information on the 
geographical, geological, and ecological characteristics of OCS 
regions; (2) equitable sharing of developmental benefits and 
environmental risks among the various regions; (3) the location of such 
regions with respect to, and the relative needs of, regional and 
national energy markets; (4) the location of such regions with respect 
to other uses of the sea and seabed, including fisheries, navigation, 
existing or proposed sea lanes, potential sites of deepwater ports, and 
other anticipated uses of the resources and space of the OCS; (5) 
expressed industry interest in the development of oil and gas 
resources; (6) laws, goals, and policies of affected States 
specifically identified by governors; (7) the relative environmental 
sensitivity and marine productivity of different areas of the OCS; and 
(8) environmental and predictive information for different areas of the 
OCS.
    Section 18(a)(3) of the OCS Lands Act, 43 U.S.C. 1344(a)(3), 
requires the Secretary to obtain a proper balance among the potential 
for environmental damage, the potential for discovery of oil and gas, 
and the potential for adverse impact on the coastal zone, for which the 
DOI will provide a cost-benefit analysis, as appropriate, to supplement 
qualitative consideration of these factors. The OCS Lands Act also 
requires that leasing activities assure the receipt of fair market 
value for the lands leased and rights conveyed by the Federal 
Government in the OCS. Section 18(a)(4) of the OCS Lands Act, 43 U.S.C. 
1344(a)(4).

Types of Information Requested

    BOEM invites comments from anyone who would like to submit 
information and/or suggestions for consideration in determining, among 
others things, the appropriate size, timing, and location of

[[Page 30889]]

potential OCS oil and gas lease sales under the 2019-2024 Program. 
Please note that BOEM invites all private and public stakeholders, as 
well as the general public, to comment or provide any information that 
they believe should be taken into consideration by BOEM during the 
preparation of the 2019-2024 Program.
    This request constitutes a general solicitation of comments and 
does not seek information about commenters, other than that necessary 
for self-identification. Therefore it is not subject to the Paperwork 
Reduction Act, 44 U.S.C. 3501-3521. (Please refer to implementing 
regulations at 5 CFR 1320.3(h)(4).)

General Information Requested

    BOEM would like to receive comments and suggestions of national or 
regional application that would be useful in formulating the National 
OCS Program. The types of information that would be most useful in 
conducting the analysis, pursuant to section 18 of the OCS Lands Act, 
relate to the following factors:
    (1) National energy needs for the period relevant to the new 
National OCS Program (i.e., 2019 to 2024), in particular, the role of 
OCS oil and gas leasing and resulting exploration, development and 
production activities in achieving national energy policy goals; the 
economic, social, and environmental values of the renewable and 
nonrenewable resources contained in the OCS; and the potential impact 
of oil and gas exploration and development on other OCS resource values 
and the marine, coastal, and human environments;
    (2) existing information concerning geographical, geological, and 
ecological characteristics of the OCS planning areas and near shore and 
coastal environments;
    (3) equitable sharing of developmental benefits and environmental 
risks among the various planning areas;
    (4) location of planning areas with respect to, and the relative 
needs of, regional and national energy markets;
    (5) other uses of the sea and seabed, including commercial and 
recreational fisheries; navigation; military activities; existing or 
proposed sea lanes; potential sites of deepwater ports (including 
liquefied natural gas facilities); subsea cables; satellite launch 
activities; potential offshore wind, wave, current, or other 
alternative energy sites; and other anticipated uses of OCS resources 
and locations;
    (6) relative environmental sensitivity and marine productivity of 
the different planning areas and/or a specific section(s) of a given 
OCS planning area;
    (7) environmental and predictive information pertaining to offshore 
and coastal areas potentially affected by OCS oil and gas development 
including, but not limited to, socio-cultural and archaeological 
information; and
    (8) methods and procedures for assuring the receipt of fair market 
value for lands leased.

Fair Market Value Information Requested

    In developing the methods and procedures for assuring the receipt 
of fair market value for lands leased under section 18(a)(4) of the OCS 
Lands Act, 43 U.S.C. 1344(a)(4), BOEM sets lease fiscal and temporal 
terms, and other features relevant to bidding. Given BOEM's 
responsibility to ensure fair market value for the U.S. Government, 
BOEM is seeking information in response to the following questions:
    (1) If DOI continues leasing in the Gulf of Mexico planning areas, 
are there changes to lease terms that would better meet the objectives 
of the OCS Lands Act? Lease terms subject to change include:
    a. Minimum bids
    b. Rental rates
    c. Royalty rates, royalty structures (e.g., flat or price-based)
    d. Initial period (also known as primary term) of the lease term 
and extended initial period (such as, 7 years plus 3 years more if 
drilling commences)
    (2) If DOI offers acreage for lease in planning areas outside the 
Gulf of Mexico, what fiscal terms for each planning area would best 
meet the objectives and limitations of the OCS Lands Act regarding the 
lease terms listed in items 1a. to 1d. above?
    a. Is there an alternative design (e.g., auction-type design) that 
may be better suited to achieve fair market value, either by changing 
the bidding variable or some other aspect of the competitive lease 
sale?
    b. Should the upcoming program consider use of alternative and/or 
non-traditional fiscal terms, primary lease terms, auction formats, or 
tract offering sizes? Please state which of these features of the 
leasing process merit consideration for future use, where and under 
what conditions those changes might be useful, and explain why such a 
change would be necessary or beneficial, e.g., demonstrate that 
exploration would not occur in selected frontier areas without larger 
than traditionally-sized tracts in lease sales.
    Please note that BOEM is requesting information on these topics to 
inform its continuing evaluation of market conditions, available 
resources, bidding patterns (if applicable), and competitiveness of OCS 
lease terms with respect to each proposed sale. BOEM is asking for 
public input regarding lease terms or potential changes to lease terms 
concerning acreage offered during the 2019-2024 Program.

Specific Information Requested

From States
    For Coastal States, pursuant to section 18(f)(5) of the OCS Lands 
Act, 43 U.S.C. 1344(f)(5), and implementing regulations at 30 CFR 
556.202, BOEM requests information concerning the relationship between 
OCS oil and gas activity and the States' coastal zone management 
programs that are being developed, or are administered, under section 
305 or 306 of the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972, as amended, 16 
U.S.C. 1454, 1455. BOEM also requests that non-coastal and Coastal 
States submit information concerning environmental risk and potential 
for damage to coastal and marine resources associated with OCS 
development, information related to other uses of the sea, and any 
information that is relevant to equitable sharing of developmental 
benefits and environmental risks associated with OCS oil and gas 
activity (or the likely energy substitutes in the absence of new OCS 
leasing). In addition, for non-coastal and Coastal States, information 
is requested on the impacts of additional OCS leasing, exploration and 
production and the associated economic impact on the State and national 
economies and citizens, including impacts to employment, existing and 
new industries, future export potential, and state taxes.
From the Oil and Gas Industry
    Pursuant to section 18(a)(2)(E) of the OCS Lands Act, 43 U.S.C. 
1344(a)(2)(E), BOEM will take into account, during the preparation of 
the National OCS Program, the interest of oil and gas producers in the 
development of oil and gas resources, as indicated by exploration or 
nomination. Industry respondents should base this information upon 
their expectations as of 2017. For each planning area in which industry 
respondents are interested, they should submit information concerning 
unleased hydrocarbon potential, future oil and gas price expectations, 
and other relevant information that the industry respondent uses in 
making OCS oil and gas leasing decisions. BOEM requests that industry 
respondents provide

[[Page 30890]]

additional information, as specified below:
    (1) Indicate the OCS Planning Area(s) where the industry respondent 
would be interested in acquiring oil and gas leases, regardless of 
whether the area currently is unavailable. If more than one Planning 
Area is of interest, rank all areas of interest (including those now 
being offered, if appropriate) in order of preference.
    (2) Indicate the number and timing of lease sales in the period 
2019-2024 that would be appropriate for each Planning Area. If only one 
lease sale in a Planning Area is appropriate, indicate whether that 
area should be considered for leasing early or late in the five-year 
schedule. If more than one lease sale in a planning area is suggested, 
indicate the preferred interval between lease sales.
    (3) Indicate the expected lead time to production in areas that are 
not part of the 2017-2022 Program or currently do not have 
infrastructure or production, relative to lead-times to new production 
in previously leased areas like the Central and Western Gulf of Mexico.
    (4) In addition, BOEM requests information on industry's view of 
the utility of region-wide sales in the Gulf of Mexico as planned in 
the 2017-2022 National Program.
    Section 18(g) of the OCS Lands Act, 43 U.S.C. 1344(g), authorizes 
confidential treatment of privileged or proprietary information. In 
order to ensure security and confidentiality of proprietary information 
to the maximum extent possible, BOEM requests that proprietary 
information only be sent by U.S. mail. In addition to prominently 
stating that proprietary information is contained in the comment at the 
beginning of the submission, comments should be sent in a plain outer 
envelope with an inner envelope stating that proprietary information is 
contained within.
From the U.S. Department of Commerce
    Pursuant to section 18(f)(5) of the OCS Lands Act, 43 U.S.C. 
1344(f)(5), and implementing regulations at 30 CFR 556.202, BOEM 
requests information concerning relationships between affected States' 
coastal zone management programs and OCS oil and gas activities. In 
coordination with this RFI, BOEM will also send a letter to the 
Secretary of Commerce soliciting such information.
From the U.S. Department of Energy
    Pursuant to BOEM's regulations at 30 CFR 556.202, BOEM requests 
information concerning regional and national energy markets, and 
transportation networks, including the role of exports. In coordination 
with this RFI, BOEM will also send a letter to the Secretary of Energy 
soliciting such information.
From the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD)
    BOEM respects the needs of DOD in their mission of protecting the 
United States and continues to work closely with DOD to understand and 
identify potential measures to address any conflicts on the OCS. 
Multiple use challenges are a concern in many OCS areas, in particular 
the military's use of portions of the Mid- and South Atlantic Planning 
Areas. As in the past, BOEM requests that DOD provide textual and 
graphic information as to the areas where oil and gas operations could 
be carried out. BOEM and DOD are committed to working through multiple 
use challenges so that each of our important missions is accomplished. 
Such detailed cooperation already occurs in the GOM and offshore 
California. During preparation of the 2017-2022 Program, DOD identified 
95 percent of the proposed Atlantic Program Area as largely compatible 
with oil and gas activities, as long as appropriate mitigation measures 
are applied.

Public Comment Procedure

    BOEM will accept comments in one of two formats: The internet 
commenting system, <a href="http://regulations.gov">regulations.gov</a>, or regular U.S. mail. Comments 
submitted by other means may not be considered. BOEM's strong 
preference is to receive comments via <a href="http://regulations.gov">regulations.gov</a>, except in the 
event that a comment contains information that is proprietary. Comments 
should be submitted using only one of these formats, and include full 
names and addresses of the individual submitting the comment(s). Before 
including personal identifying information in your comment, you should 
be aware that your entire comment--including your personal identifying 
information--may be made publicly available at any time. While you can 
ask us in your comment to withhold your personal identifying 
information from public review, we cannot guarantee that we will be 
able to do so.

Commenting via Internet

    Internet comments should be submitted via the Federal internet 
commenting system at <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a>. BOEM requests that 
commenters follow these instructions to submit their comments via this 
Web site:
    (1) In the search tab on the main page, search for BOEM-2017-0050.
    (2) Locate the document, then click the ``Submit a Comment'' link 
either on the Search Results page or the Document Details page. This 
will display the Web comment form.
    (3) Enter the submitter information and type the comment on the Web 
form. Attach any additional files (up to 10MB). (BOEM cannot ensure the 
security or confidentiality of information sent via the internet; 
therefore, information that is proprietary should be provided by U.S. 
mail as provided in the ``From Oil and Gas Industry'' section of this 
RFI.)
    (4) After typing the comment, click the ``Preview Comment'' link to 
review. Once satisfied with the comment, click the ``Submit'' button to 
send the comment.
    Information on using Regulations.gov, including instructions for 
accessing documents, submitting comments, and viewing the docket after 
the close of the comment period, is available through the site's ``User 
Tips'' link.

Commenting via Regular Mail

    Mail comments and information on the 2019-2024 Program to Ms. Kelly 
Hammerle, National Program Manager, BOEM, 45600 Woodland Road, Mailstop 
VAM-LD, Sterling, VA 20166.
    BOEM will post all comments to <a href="http://regulations.gov">regulations.gov</a>, subject to the 
limitations described in this section.

     Dated: June 28, 2017.
Walter D. Cruickshank,
Acting Director, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management.
 BILLING CODE 4310-MR-P

[[Page 30891]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TN03JY17.000


[[Page 30892]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TN03JY17.001

[FR Doc. 2017-13998 Filed 6-30-17; 8:45 am]
 BILLING CODE 4310-MR-C


</pre></body>
</html>