<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 88 Issue 149 (Friday, August 4, 2023)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 88, Number 149 (Friday, August 4, 2023)]
[Notices]
[Pages 51853-51855]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2023-16794]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Office of the Secretary

[234D0102DM, DS61200000, DLSN00000.000000, DX61201]


Draft Prospectus for the First National Nature Assessment

AGENCY: Office of Policy Analysis, Interior.

ACTION: Notice, request for public comments.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: With this notice, the U.S. Global Change Research Program 
(USGCRP) seeks public comment on the proposed themes and framework of 
the First National Nature Assessment. Based on input received from this 
notice, USGCRP will begin the next phases of assessment development.

DATES: Comments must be submitted by 11:59 p.m. on September 18, 2023.

ADDRESSES: Comments from the public will be accepted electronically via 
<a href="https://www.globalchange.gov/notices">https://www.globalchange.gov/notices</a>. Instructions for submitting 
comments are available on the website. Submitters may enter text or 
upload files in response to this notice.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Chris Avery, (202) 419-3474, 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#91f2f0e7f4e3e8d1e4e2f6f2e3e1bff6fee7"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="4724263122353e0732342024353769202831">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>, U.S. Global Change Research Program.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The U.S. Global Change Research Program 
(USGCRP) was created by Congress in 1990 to ``assist the Nation and the 
world to understand, assess, predict, and respond to human-induced and 
natural processes of global change.'' USGCRP comprises 14 Federal 
agencies that work together to carry out its legislative mandate. 
USGCRP is conducting the First National Nature Assessment (NNA1) to 
assess changes in nature as an aspect of global change. With this 
notice, the United States Department of the Interior, on behalf of the 
USGCRP, seeks public comment on a prospectus for NNA1.
    The scope of NNA1 is to assess the status, observed trends, and 
future projections of America's lands, waters, wildlife, biodiversity, 
and ecosystems and the benefits they provide, including connections to 
the economy, public health, equity, climate mitigation and adaptation, 
and national security.
    In developing NNA1, USGCRP will follow the principles of a use-
inspired, knowledge-informed assessment, in which the design is driven 
both by the potential uses of the final products and by science and 
other forms of knowledge. USGCRP recognizes the importance of lived 
experiences and acknowledges Indigenous Knowledge as an important form 
of evidence. Across all phases of NNA1, USGCRP aims to be inclusive, 
represent diverse perspectives, and create products that are accessible 
to the widest possible audience. To achieve these aims, USGCRP will 
engage the public and Tribal Nations multiple times throughout the 
development process, using diverse means to increase accessibility and 
inclusion.

I. Development of the First National Nature Assessment Through a 
Proposed Report and Portfolio of Associated Products

    Striving for a use-inspired and knowledge-informed assessment, 
USGCRP initiated NNA1 with requests for input. This included 
engagements with federal agencies, the public, and Tribal and 
Indigenous communities. Input was sought through a Request for 
Information (87 FR 65622) on what specific questions the assessment 
should answer, what products should be created, what engagement 
processes should be used, and what knowledge sources should be drawn 
from, among other topics. USGCRP held multiple public engagement 
sessions and a formal Tribal Consultation. Over 3,000 comments were 
received online and through the engagement and Consultation sessions.
    The Federal Steering Committee overseeing the development of NNA1 
considered this public and Tribal input when developing the proposed 
elements of the assessment described below. For example, input showed 
that different communities have different questions relevant to the 
scope of NNA1 and would like to use information from the assessment in 
different ways. To be responsive to that input, USGCRP intends to 
develop a portfolio of assessment products of which an NNA1 report will 
be a core component. Additional products could include special issues 
of peer-reviewed journals; technical input reports; and community-
created videos portraying diverse perspectives of nature, observed 
changes to nature, consequences of those changes, and the importance of 
nature.

II. The First National Nature Assessment: A Use-Inspired, Knowledge-
Driven Report

    The NNA1 will assess the state of knowledge regarding the status, 
observed trends, and future projections of nature in the United States 
and the consequences of those changes including shifts in the benefits 
that nature provides. NNA1 will consider nature in U.S. states, marine 
areas (U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone), territories, Native or Indigenous 
lands and waters, and other affiliated areas (as appropriate), as well 
as its significant interactions with global drivers.
    The core product of NNA1 will be a use-inspired, knowledge-driven 
report that addresses a diverse set of questions received via public 
and Tribal input. USGCRP received many questions, spanning a range of 
themes, that potential users posed. This draft prospectus prioritizes a 
subset of these questions for consideration in this initial assessment. 
The questions included in the report will be addressed in a manner that 
meets specific Federal guidelines for information quality, information 
tracking, and technical development required of a Highly Influential 
Scientific Assessment. Findings will be made accessible through a range 
of user-specific outputs as described below. Consistent with Federal 
law, the report will support disability access and inclusion.

III. Overarching Themes of the First National Nature Assessment

    The NNA1 report is currently planned to be organized around key 
thematic interests identified through federal agency, public, and 
Tribal engagement efforts. Those themes are (in alphabetical order):

<bullet> Conservation and Natural Resource Management
<bullet> Economic Interests
<bullet> Human Health and Well-Being
<bullet> Safety and Security

    There are not discrete boundaries among these themes, and the 
proposed report would be structured and conducted to recognize and 
explore interconnections and tradeoffs among them, as possible. The 
themes and related focal questions are described in greater detail 
below. Federal agency, public, and Tribal input identified two cross-
cutting areas that are woven throughout the other proposed themes for 
the NNA1 report:

<bullet> Climate Change

[[Page 51854]]

<bullet> Equity

    To help reinforce the principle of being use-inspired, the proposed 
assessment would include presentation of themes through the lens of 
different user groups. In doing so, the technical results will be put 
into contexts and products that are relevant for diverse audiences.
    A call for author nominations will be posted in a subsequent 
Federal Register notice. Authors will be tasked with assessing the 
state of knowledge, considering relevant aspects of historical trends, 
drivers of change, current status, and future projections, and the 
implications of those changes. Teams may assess technical information 
or scenarios on policy options to reverse declining trends in nature or 
the benefits that nature provides. Author teams will also seek to 
evaluate relevant regional variation in geography, climate, 
biodiversity, and culture, as well as other varying conditions that 
might be relevant to a scientific assessment.
    In addition to a report, USGCRP will aim to develop other science 
and communication products that are responsive to user interests 
expressed through public, Tribal, and agency input. Outputs may 
include, but are not limited to, data dashboards, maps, graphics, 
indicators, user-specific summaries, and other communication materials. 
Consistent with Federal law and best scientific practices, data used in 
the assessment will be publicly available to the maximum extent 
practicable. The assessment will present a collection of resources to 
help ensure users can build on the results and develop tools or 
resources further tailored to their needs.

Conservation and Natural Resource Management

    Public, Tribal, and agency input highlighted the importance of 
sustainable conservation and management of biodiversity, natural 
resources, and ecosystems to ensure their long-term preservation and 
protection for their own sake and for the benefit of present and future 
generations. USGCRP proposes to address a subset of focal questions 
related to these interests, such as:
    <bullet> What are the existing status, trends, and drivers of 
change affecting species and ecosystems in the U.S., and what are 
important areas for representative biodiversity across U.S. lands and 
waters?
    <bullet> How have access to nature and to associated benefits 
changed, and for whom?
    <bullet> How have culturally significant species and ecosystems 
changed, and what are future options for sustaining them?
    <bullet> How would future investments in conservation or 
restoration affect nature, equitable access to nature's benefits, and 
climate mitigation and adaptation?

Economic Interests

    Public, Tribal, and agency input raised interest in economic 
activities, infrastructure, and employment that are directly or 
indirectly related to nature. Within this theme, the report would 
explore how changes in nature affect economic benefits, risks, and 
opportunities. USGCRP proposes to address a subset of focal questions 
related to these interests, such as:
    <bullet> How many jobs are dependent on nature, and how have 
changes in nature affected jobs and livelihoods, and for whom?
    <bullet> What aspects of the U.S. economy are connected to the 
status and trends of nature, and what future options for advancing the 
economy could provide net benefits to nature and the climate?
    <bullet> Where could future infrastructure and economic development 
advance with the most benefit and least harm to nature and nature's 
benefits?

Human Health and Well-Being

    Public, Tribal, and agency input emphasized the connections between 
changes in nature and human health and well-being, including links to 
physical health, mental health, and social health and well-being. 
USGCRP proposes to address a subset of focal questions related to these 
interests, such as:
    <bullet> How have changes in nature affected physical, mental, and 
public health, as well as the equity of health risks and benefits?
    <bullet> What are emerging health effects from changes in nature?
    <bullet> What are future nature-based options to reduce health 
risks and enhance benefits for all people?

Safety and Security

    Public, Tribal, and agency input highlighted issues related to ways 
in which changes in nature impact aspects of domestic safety and 
security. Topics of interest included changes in nature, such as 
increased frequency and intensity of natural hazards, desertification, 
changes in populations of pests and disease, loss of arable land, and 
other changes in nature that affect food and water security, and that 
directly or indirectly influence public safety and patterns of human 
behavior and movements. USGCRP proposes to address a subset of 
questions related to these interests, such as:
    <bullet> What losses from natural and environmental hazards (e.g., 
loss of life, loss of livelihoods and economic productivity, damage to 
homes or infrastructure, loss of educational opportunities, damage to 
or loss of natural and cultural resources) have been averted by nature 
(e.g., protected areas, green and blue infrastructure, restored areas) 
over time, and for whom? Where and how much can nature-based solutions 
equitably reduce future risk from natural and environmental hazards?
    <bullet> How have trends and spatial patterns in nature affected 
food and water security, and for whom? What are opportunities for 
nature-based solutions to avert emerging food and water security risks?
    <bullet> Where might changes in nature and climate cause people 
within the United States to migrate from their current locations, and 
where might they go? What nature- or natural resource-related risks and 
opportunities are they likely to face when they relocate?

Climate

    Public, Tribal, and agency input emphasized the strong interactions 
between changes in nature, nature's benefits, and the climate. Each of 
the four themes described above interacts with the climate. USGCRP 
proposes to synthesize and analyze climate-related opportunities and 
impacts across the four NNA1 themes by considering the relevant role of 
climate as a driver when assessing past trends in nature, including 
projected climate changes in answering questions about the future of 
nature, and answering the specific questions about interactions between 
nature and climate embedded in the themes above.

Equity

    Public, Tribal and agency input highlighted the importance of 
environmental justice, inclusive decision-making, and equal access to 
nature and nature's benefits. The four NNA1 themes each include 
questions that address aspects of equity and the fair and just 
distribution of nature's benefits. USGCRP proposes to synthesize the 
impacts of changes in nature to equity and assess how changes in nature 
across the NNA1 themes impact the well-being and opportunities for all 
members of society.
    In developing this report, USGCRP proposes to reflect and follow 
several recommendations received through the engagement process. The 
Federal Steering Committee developing NNA1 recognizes the importance 
and value of co-production, acknowledges the need

[[Page 51855]]

to balance a co-production intent with the current institutional and 
resource constraints, strives to apply the concept of bridging 
knowledge systems--maintaining the integrity of different knowledge 
systems while weaving them together--and aims to create equitable space 
for all knowledge systems and knowledge holders. In doing so, USGCRP 
will respect the rights, values, and knowledge held by Indigenous and 
local communities.

IV. Development of Associated Products

    In addition to a use-inspired, knowledge-informed NNA1 report, 
input from the public, Tribes, and agencies emphasized the need for an 
array of products associated with NNA1. Public and Tribal input 
emphasized the diversity of perspectives that people hold on nature and 
the impact of nature on their lives. The comments requested that USGCRP 
reflect that diversity, and as much as possible, do so in the voices of 
people themselves. In response to this input, USGCRP will explore the 
feasibility of video-based products related to the scope of NNA1. 
Video-based products would allow people from various perspectives to 
share their stories and reactions to questions such as: why is nature 
important to me, how is nature changing, and why does this matter?
    USGCRP will also explore development of special issues of peer-
reviewed journals and publication of technical reports on specific 
topics, with the intent that these efforts address additional questions 
received through the engagement process, close research gaps, 
strengthen individual aspects of the available knowledge base, and 
potentially serve as inputs to NNA1. For example, one such journal 
special issue recommended through Tribal Consultation is an Indigenous-
led volume that explores perspectives of Indigenous Knowledge holders 
and scholars relevant to the scope of NNA1. A technical report with a 
focus on nature literacy relevant to the scope of NNA1 has also been 
recommended.
    We seek public input on all aspects of the proposed NNA1.
    Responses: Response to this Request for Comment is voluntary. 
Respondents need not comment on all topics. Responses may be used by 
the U.S. Government for program planning on a non-attribution basis. 
The United States Department of Interior therefore requests that no 
business proprietary information or copyrighted information be 
submitted in response to this Request for Comment. Please note that the 
U.S. Government will not pay for response preparation, or for the use 
of any information contained in the response.

Eric Werwa,
Deputy Assistant Secretary--Policy and Environmental Management, Office 
of Policy, Management, and Budget.
[FR Doc. 2023-16794 Filed 8-3-23; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4334-63-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>