<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 90 Issue 165 (Thursday, August 28, 2025)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 165 (Thursday, August 28, 2025)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 41900-41921]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2025-16440]



[[Page 41900]]

=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Fish and Wildlife Service

50 CFR Parts 32 and 71

[Docket No. FWS-HQ-NWRS-2025-0031; FXRS12610900000-256-FF09R20000]
RIN 1018-BI01


National Wildlife Refuge System; 2025-2026 Station-Specific 
Hunting and Sport Fishing Regulations

AGENCY: Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: We, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service), open or 
expand hunting or sport fishing opportunities on 16 National Wildlife 
Refuge System (NWRS) stations and 1 National Fish Hatchery System 
(NFHS) station. This includes inaugural hunting opportunities at 
Southern Maryland Woodlands National Wildlife Refuge (NWR), the newest 
addition to the NWRS, and the formal opening of hunting opportunities 
at Grasslands Wildlife Management Area (WMA), as well as inaugural 
sport fishing at North Attleboro National Fish Hatchery (NFH). These 
actions open or expand 42 opportunities for hunting and fishing across 
more than 87,000 acres of Service-managed lands and waters. We also 
make administrative changes to existing station-specific regulations to 
improve the clarity and accuracy of regulations, reduce the regulatory 
burden on the public, and comply with a Presidential mandate for plain-
language standards.

DATES: This rule is effective August 27, 2025.
    Information Collection Requirements: If you wish to comment on the 
information collection requirements in this rule, please note that the 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is required to make a decision 
concerning the collection of information contained in this rule between 
30 and 60 days after the date of publication of this rule in the 
Federal Register. Therefore, comments should be submitted to OMB by 
September 29, 2025.

ADDRESSES: This final rule is available on the internet at <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a>. Comments and materials we received are available 
for public inspection at <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a> at Docket No. FWS-
HQ-NWRS-2025-0031.
    Information Collection Requirements: Written comments and 
suggestions on the information collection requirements should be 
submitted within 30 days of publication of this document to <a href="https://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/PRAMain">https://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/PRAMain</a>. Find this particular information 
collection by selecting ``Currently under Review--Open for Public 
Comments'' or by using the search function. Please provide a copy of 
your comments to the Service Information Collection Clearance Officer, 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 5275 Leesburg Pike, MS: PRB (JAO/3W), 
Falls Church, VA 22041-3803 (mail); or <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#de97b0b8b1819db1b2b29eb8a9adf0b9b1a8"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="470e2921281804282b2b0721303469202831">[email&#160;protected]</span></a> (email). 
Please reference OMB Control Number 1018-0140 in the subject line of 
your comments.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Christian Myers, (571) 422-3595. 
Please see Docket No. FWS-HQ-NWRS-2025-0031 on <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a> for a document that summarizes these revisions and 
additions to the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Individuals in the 
United States who are deaf, deafblind, hard of hearing, or have a 
speech disability may dial 711 (TTY, TDD, or TeleBraille) to access 
telecommunications relay services. Individuals outside the United 
States should use the relay services offered within their country to 
make international calls to the point-of-contact in the United States.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Background

    The National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 
U.S.C. 668dd-668ee), as amended (Administration Act), closes NWRs in 
all States except Alaska to all uses until opened. The Secretary of the 
Interior (Secretary) may open refuge areas to any use, including 
hunting and/or sport fishing, upon a determination that the use is 
compatible with the purposes of the refuge and National Wildlife Refuge 
System (Refuge System) mission. The action also must be in accordance 
with provisions of all laws applicable to the areas, developed in 
coordination with the appropriate State fish and wildlife agency(ies), 
consistent with the principles of sound fish and wildlife management 
and administration, and otherwise in the public interest. These 
requirements ensure that we maintain the biological integrity, 
diversity, and environmental health of the Refuge System for the 
benefit of present and future generations of Americans.
    We annually review hunting and sport fishing programs to determine 
whether to include additional stations or whether individual station 
regulations governing existing programs need modifications. Changing 
environmental conditions, State and Federal regulations, and other 
factors affecting fish and wildlife populations and habitat may warrant 
modifications to station-specific regulations to ensure the continued 
compatibility of hunting and sport fishing programs and to ensure that 
these programs will not materially interfere with or detract from the 
fulfillment of station purposes or the Refuge System's mission.
    Provisions governing hunting and sport fishing on refuges are in 
title 50 of the CFR at part 32 (50 CFR part 32), and on hatcheries at 
part 71 (50 CFR part 71). We regulate hunting and sport fishing to:
    <bullet> Ensure compatibility with refuge and hatchery purpose(s);
    <bullet> Properly manage fish and wildlife resource(s);
    <bullet> Protect other values;
    <bullet> Ensure visitor safety; and
    <bullet> Provide opportunities for fish- and wildlife-dependent 
recreation.
    On many stations where we decide to allow hunting and sport 
fishing, our general policy of adopting regulations identical to State 
hunting and sport fishing regulations is adequate to meet these 
objectives. On other stations, we must supplement State regulations 
with more-restrictive Federal regulations to ensure that we meet our 
management responsibilities, as outlined under Statutory Authority, 
below. We issue station-specific hunting and sport fishing regulations 
when we open national wildlife refuges and fish hatcheries to migratory 
game bird hunting, upland game hunting, big game hunting, or sport 
fishing. These regulations may list the wildlife species that you may 
hunt or fish; seasons; bag or creel (container for carrying fish) 
limits; methods of hunting or sport fishing; descriptions of areas open 
to hunting or sport fishing; and other provisions as appropriate.

Statutory Authority

    The Administration Act, as amended by the National Wildlife Refuge 
System Improvement Act of 1997 (Improvement Act; Pub. L. 105-57), 
governs the administration and public use of refuges, and the Refuge 
Recreation Act of 1962 (Recreation Act; 16 U.S.C. 460k-460k-4) governs 
the administration and public use of refuges and hatcheries.
    Amendments enacted by the Improvement Act were built upon the 
Administration Act in a manner that provides an ``organic act'' for the 
Refuge System, similar to organic acts that exist for other public 
Federal lands. The Improvement Act serves to ensure that we effectively 
manage the Refuge System as a national network of lands, waters, and 
interests for the protection and conservation of our Nation's

[[Page 41901]]

wildlife resources. The Administration Act states first and foremost 
that we focus our Refuge System mission on conservation of fish, 
wildlife, and plant resources and their habitats. The Improvement Act 
requires the Secretary, before allowing a new use of a refuge, or 
before expanding, renewing, or extending an existing use of a refuge, 
to determine that the use is compatible with the purpose for which the 
refuge was established and the mission of the Refuge System. The 
Improvement Act established as the policy of the United States that 
wildlife-dependent recreation, when compatible, is a legitimate and 
appropriate public use of the Refuge System, through which the American 
public can develop an appreciation for fish and wildlife. The 
Improvement Act established six wildlife-dependent recreational uses as 
the priority general public uses of the Refuge System. These uses are 
hunting, fishing, wildlife observation and photography, and 
environmental education and interpretation.
    The Recreation Act authorizes the Secretary to administer areas 
within the Refuge System and Hatchery System for public recreation as 
an appropriate incidental or secondary use only to the extent that 
doing so is practicable and not inconsistent with the primary 
purpose(s) for which Congress and the Service established the areas. 
The Recreation Act requires that any recreational use of refuge or 
hatchery lands be compatible with the primary purpose(s) for which we 
established the refuge and not inconsistent with other previously 
authorized operations.
    The Administration Act and Recreation Act also authorize the 
Secretary to issue regulations to carry out the purposes of the Acts 
and regulate uses.
    We develop specific management plans for each refuge prior to 
opening it to hunting or sport fishing. In many cases, we develop 
station-specific regulations to ensure the compatibility of the 
programs with the purpose(s) for which we established the refuge or 
hatchery and the Refuge and Hatchery System mission. We ensure initial 
compliance with the Administration Act and the Recreation Act for 
hunting and sport fishing on newly acquired land through an interim 
determination of compatibility made at or near the time of acquisition. 
These regulations ensure that we make the determinations required by 
these acts prior to adding refuges or hatcheries to the lists of areas 
open to hunting and sport fishing in 50 CFR part 32 or 71, 
respectively. We ensure continued compliance by the development of 
comprehensive conservation plans and step-down management plans, and by 
annual review of hunting and sport fishing programs and regulations.

Summary of Comments and Responses

    On May 15, 2025, we published in the Federal Register (90 FR 20600) 
a proposed rule to modify hunting and fishing programs at 16 refuges 
and 1 hatchery for the 2025-2026 season. We accepted public comments on 
the proposed rule for 45 days, ending June 30, 2025. By that date, we 
received 194 comments on the proposed rule. Approximately 95 percent of 
these comments were form letters or otherwise identical duplicates of 
other comments on the proposed rule. We discuss the remaining unique 
comments we received below by topic. Beyond our responses below, 
additional station-specific information on how we responded to comments 
on particular hunting or fishing opportunities at a given refuge or 
hatchery can be found in that station's final hunting and/or fishing 
package, available at <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a> at Docket No. FWS-HQ-
NWRS-2025-0031.
    Comment (1): We received several comments expressing general 
support for the proposed changes in the rule. These comments of general 
support either expressed appreciation for the increased hunting and 
fishing access in the rule overall, expressed appreciation for 
increased access at particular refuges, or both. In addition to this 
general support, some commenters requested additional hunting and 
fishing opportunities.
    Our Response: Hunting and fishing on Service lands is a tradition 
that dates back to the early 1900s. In passing the Improvement Act, 
Congress reaffirmed that the Refuge System was created to conserve 
fish, wildlife, plants, and their habitats, and would facilitate 
opportunities for Americans to participate in compatible wildlife-
dependent recreation, including hunting and fishing on Refuge System 
lands. We prioritize wildlife-dependent recreation, including hunting 
and fishing, when doing so is compatible with the purpose of the refuge 
and the mission of the NWRS.
    We will continue to open and expand hunting and sport fishing 
opportunities across the Refuge System; however, as detailed further in 
our response to Comment (2), below, opening or expanding hunting or 
fishing opportunities on Service lands is not a quick or simple 
process. The annual regulatory cycle begins in June or July of each 
year for the following hunting and sport fishing season (the planning 
cycle for this 2025-2026 final rule began in June 2024). This annual 
timeline allows us time to collaborate closely with our State, Tribal, 
and Territorial partners, as well as other partners including 
nongovernmental organizations, on potential opportunities. It also 
provides us with time to complete environmental analyses and other 
requirements for opening or expanding new opportunities. Therefore, it 
would be impracticable for the Service to complete multiple regulatory 
cycles in one calendar year due to the logistics of coordinating with 
various partners. Once we determine that a hunting or sport fishing 
opportunity can be carried out in a manner compatible with individual 
station purposes and objectives, we work expeditiously to open it.
    We did not make any changes to the rule as a result of these 
comments.
    Comment (2): Several commenters expressed general opposition to any 
hunting or fishing in the Refuge System. Some of these commenters 
stated that hunting was antithetical to the purposes of a refuge, 
which, in their opinion, should serve as an inviolate sanctuary for all 
wildlife. The remaining commenters generically opposed expanded or new 
hunting or fishing opportunities at specific stations.
    Our Response: The Service prioritizes facilitating wildlife-
dependent recreational opportunities, including hunting and fishing, on 
Service land in compliance with applicable Service law and policy. For 
refuges, the Administration Act stipulates that hunting (along with 
fishing, wildlife observation and photography, and environmental 
education and interpretation), if found to be compatible, is a 
legitimate and priority general public use of a refuge and should be 
facilitated (16 U.S.C. 668dd(a)(3)(D)). Thus, we only allow hunting of 
wildlife on Refuge System lands if such activity has been determined 
compatible with the established purpose(s) of the refuge and the 
mission of the Refuge System as required by the Administration Act. For 
all 17 stations for which hunting and/or fishing programs were modified 
in this rule, we determined that the proposed actions were compatible.
    Each station manager makes a decision regarding hunting and fishing 
opportunities only after rigorous examination of the available 
information, consultation and coordination with States and Tribes, and 
compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA; 42 U.S.C. 
4321 et seq.) and section 7 of the

[[Page 41902]]

Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (ESA; 16 U.S.C. 1531 et 
seq.), as well as other applicable laws and regulations. The many steps 
taken before a station opens or expands ensure that the Service does 
not allow hunting or fishing opportunities that would compromise the 
purpose of the station or the mission of the agency.
    Hunting of resident wildlife on Service lands generally occurs 
consistent with State regulations, including seasons and bag limits. 
Station-specific hunting regulations can be more restrictive (but not 
more permissive) than State regulations and often are more restrictive 
to help meet specific refuge objectives. These objectives include 
resident wildlife population and habitat objectives, minimizing 
disturbance impacts to wildlife, maintaining high-quality opportunities 
for hunting and other wildlife-dependent recreation, minimizing 
conflicts with other public uses and/or refuge management activities, 
and protecting public safety.
    The word ``refuge'' includes the idea of providing a haven of 
safety as one of its definitions, and as such, hunting might seem an 
inconsistent use of the Refuge System. However, again, the 
Administration Act stipulates that hunting, if found compatible, is a 
legitimate and priority general public use of a wildlife refuge. 
Furthermore, we manage refuges to support healthy wildlife populations 
that in many cases produce harvestable surpluses that are a renewable 
resource. As practiced on refuges, hunting and fishing do not pose a 
negative threat to wildlife populations. It is important to recognize 
that harvesting certain individuals through hunting does not 
necessarily lead to a decrease in the overall population, as it can 
substitute for other types of mortality. In some cases, however, we use 
hunting as a management tool with the explicit goal of reducing a 
population; this is often the case with exotic and/or invasive species 
that threaten ecosystem stability. Therefore, facilitating hunting 
opportunities is an important aspect of the Service's roles and 
responsibilities as outlined in the legislation establishing the Refuge 
System, and the Service will continue to facilitate these opportunities 
where compatible with the purpose of the specific refuge and the 
mission of the Refuge System.
    We did not make any changes to the rule as a result of these 
comments.
    Comment (3): We received comments on the proposed rule from two 
individual State agencies, representing two States. The North Carolina 
Wildlife Resources Commission (NCWRC) expressed support for the 
proposed rule, with a focus on Pocosin Lakes NWR, without raising 
additional topics. The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife 
(WDFW) expressed support for the proposed rule, with a focus on Willapa 
NWR, and also urged the Service to provide additional opportunities on 
this refuge.
    Our Response: The Service appreciates the support of, and is 
committed to working with, our State partners to identify additional 
opportunities for expansion of hunting and sport fishing on Service 
lands and waters. We welcome and value State partner input on all 
aspects of our hunting and fishing programs.
    In response to the NCWRC, we appreciate the support expressed for 
the opening of a new hunting opportunity at Pocosin Lakes NWR. We value 
this input and look forward to further coordination, both on this 
opportunity and future hunting and fishing openings and expansions.
    In response to the WDFW, we appreciate the support expressed for 
waterfowl hunting and archery big game hunting opportunities on Willapa 
NWR. To date, only archery hunting has been sufficiently evaluated for 
big game hunts on these lands, so the Service cannot add any firearms 
as an additional method of take as part of this 2025-2026 annual 
update. See our responses to Comments (1) and (2) above for discussion 
of what is necessary before we can open or expand an opportunity, 
including adding additional methods of take. However, additional 
methods of take, including muzzleloader and modern firearms, could 
potentially be authorized as a future expansion for the same species 
and acres. The WDFW's assessment that the hunt area is suitable for 
firearm hunting is helpful to exploring that possibility for a future 
annual update.
    Comment (4): We received a comment from the Catawba Indian Nation 
that focused on Pocosin Lakes NWR. The comment expressed no concerns 
about the proposed rule content, but did request notification in the 
case that any Native American artifacts and/or human remains are 
located in connection with the new hunting opportunity.
    Our Response: The Service appreciates the support of the Catawba 
Indian Nation and is committed to working with our Tribal partners. As 
noted in the November 2021 Joint Secretary's Order (S.O. 3403), the 
Department of the Interior is committed, alongside the Department of 
Agriculture, to fulfilling our trust responsibility to Tribes in our 
management of Federal lands and waters. The Service seeks input from 
Tribes throughout our hunting and fishing rulemaking processes and 
welcomes every opportunity to coordinate with Tribal leaders.
    In response to the Catawba Indian Nation comment, we will honor the 
Tribe's wishes. There are no ground disturbing activities anticipated 
in connection with this new, limited-entry hunting opportunity that 
uses a temporarily placed portable stand on Pocosin Lakes NWR. 
Therefore, no impacts to Native American artifacts or human remains are 
anticipated. We look forward to further discussion and coordination 
with the Tribe on future hunting and fishing program updates.
    We did not make any changes to the rule as a result of this 
comment.
    Comment (5): We received comments on the proposed rule from six 
unique commenters expressing concern regarding the relative importance 
of the six priority public uses of the NWRS defined by the Improvement 
Act, including hunting and fishing, wildlife observation, photography, 
environmental education, and interpretation. Some commenters reasoned 
that the Service should prioritize hunting and fishing above the other 
four uses. Other commenters expressed the opposite view that the other 
four non-consumptive wildlife-dependent uses should be prioritized 
above hunting and fishing.
    Our Response: The Improvement Act identifies six priority wildlife-
dependent recreational uses of the Refuge System, but it does not 
define any hierarchy among them. When determining whether or not other 
public uses of a refuge are compatible, the Service protects these 
priority public uses, as well as the safety of visitors and refuge 
employees. In the case that conflicts arise between priority public 
uses, access for multiple uses can often be accommodated through 
restrictions or regulations, as appropriate.
    This rulemaking process is required before hunting and fishing 
opportunities can be opened or expanded on refuges because they are 
consumptive recreational uses that inherently have a greater potential 
for impacts. By completing additional analysis, including NEPA and 
interagency consultation under section 7 of the ESA, providing 
opportunity for public input, and following other applicable legal 
requirements, the Service ensures that any changes to hunting and 
fishing programs on refuges offer high-quality hunting and fishing 
opportunities that do not negatively impact refuge purposes or the 
Refuge System mission. This additional analysis is not required

[[Page 41903]]

for refuges to offer non-consumptive priority wildlife-dependent uses 
that are inherently less impactful than hunting and fishing activities, 
although these uses still require a compatibility determination and 
often require a special use permit. See our responses to Comments (1) 
and (2) above for additional discussion of what is necessary before we 
can open or expand a hunting or fishing opportunity.
    We did not make any changes to the rule as a result of these 
comments.
    Comment (6): We received comments on the proposed update from two 
unique commenters taking the position that the Service is not opening 
or expanding a sufficient number of hunting and fishing opportunities, 
when compared to previous annual updates.
    Our Response: Expanding access to nature for all Americans is a top 
priority for the Service. The size of the annual station-specific 
hunting and sport fishing updates varies from year-to-year based on 
many factors. The 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 annual updates opened or 
expanded hunting or fishing opportunities at 10 refuges and 31 refuges, 
respectively. The Service offered more than 1,000 new hunting or 
fishing opportunities across more than 2 million acres of Service-
managed lands and waters from 2019 to 2021.
    While the Service's 2025-2026 final update is smaller than some 
previous years, we acknowledge the successes of our recent rulemaking 
efforts. This year's annual update is larger than both the 2023-2024 
and 2024-2024 updates in terms of the number of stations opening or 
expanding hunting and fishing. In recent years, the Service 
successfully opened and expanded many hunting and fishing opportunities 
across numerous stations--most of which were planned and assessed long 
in advance. The number of opportunities in future annual updates may 
fluctuate while new opportunities are being identified and evaluated. 
The Service was also successful in past years at standardizing language 
and removing unnecessary and redundant provisions in the CFR. This 
action required revisions to most stations that are open to hunting or 
fishing.
    Ultimately, there is a finite number of compatible hunting and 
fishing opportunities possible on the NWRS at a given time. Once the 
Service has maximized access throughout the Refuge System, and as we 
get closer to that long-term goal, we will mostly be increasing access 
when new acres are acquired.
    Comment (7): Four separate unique comments expressed either support 
for or opposition to regulations requiring the use of lead-free hunting 
ammunition or lead-free fishing tackle. These comments spoke to the 
scientific evidence linking lead hunting ammunition and lead fishing 
tackle to lead poisoning in wildlife, the cost and availability of 
lead-free ammunition and tackle, and other topics related to the 
controversy around the use of lead ammunition and tackle.
    Our Response: The Service remains engaged in a deliberate, open, 
and transparent process for evaluating the future of lead use in 
hunting and fishing on Service lands and waters. We are considering the 
best available science, working with our State partners, and seeking 
input from other stakeholders and the public. As we continue the 
process, we appreciate the additional information provided in these 
comments and the interest in this topic that they represent.
    In this annual update, specifically, the Service is not authorizing 
any new opportunities that involve the use of lead ammunition or 
tackle, and the Service is only introducing one new requirement to use 
lead-free ammunition or tackle, which applies only to one opportunity 
on one station. As noted in the environmental assessment (EA), the new 
bear hunting opportunity on Pocosin Lakes NWR will require that 
participants use lead-free ammunition. This requirement, however, does 
not create a regulatory burden or implicate lead-free ammunition cost 
and availability because the partner organization overseeing the 
hunting opportunity will provide all needed ammunition.
    Additionally, the Service will continue its Lead-Free Hunting 
Voluntary Incentive Program that was piloted at seven NWRs during the 
fall 2024 hunting seasons. This program is designed to increase the use 
of lead-free ammunition on Service-administered lands while preserving 
hunter choice, and the program is intended to eventually serve as a 
proven model for similar efforts by State agencies and other land 
managers. More information is available online at <a href="https://www.fws.gov/press-release/2024-07/us-fish-and-wildlife-service-announces-voluntary-pilot-programs-lead-free">https://www.fws.gov/press-release/2024-07/us-fish-and-wildlife-service-announces-voluntary-pilot-programs-lead-free</a>.
    As the Service continues to consider the best available science and 
the input of partners and key stakeholders as part of an open and 
deliberative process for evaluating the future of lead use, we will 
continue to encourage voluntary use of lead-free ammunition and 
participation in the Lead-Free Hunting Voluntary Incentive Program, as 
well as the removal of gut piles.
    Comment (8): We received two comments on the proposed rule 
requesting that an environmental impact statement (EIS) be prepared for 
the rule. Several other comments expressed concern about the cumulative 
impacts of hunting considering other pressures on wildlife, including 
urbanization and climate change.
    Our Response: The Service complies with NEPA and other laws and 
regulations in preparation of the rule. In developing updates to 
hunting and fishing programs, the Service completes an analysis of 
localized direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts through NEPA, which 
includes consideration of pressures such as urbanization and climate 
change. At the individual station level, the Service additionally 
completes ESA section 7 consultation and other environmental compliance 
procedures, as appropriate. The Service also examines cumulative 
impacts through our cumulative impacts report that considers national 
and regional cumulative impacts from hunting and fishing on the Refuge 
System. These analyses are available as part of the supporting 
documents for the final rule. See our responses to Comments (1) and 
(2), above, for additional discussion of priority public uses 
identified by law and what is necessary before we can open or expand a 
hunting or fishing opportunity.
    We did not make any changes to the rule as a result of these 
comments.
    Comment (9): We received three comments focusing on the proposed 
opening of a special opportunity, limited bear hunt at Pocosin Lakes 
NWR. One comment objected to all hunting of carnivore species on 
refuges, and specifically, the proposed bear hunt at Pocosin Lakes NWR. 
The comment raised concerns about impacts to the numbers and sex ratio 
of the bear population, expressed concerns about safety, and suggested 
that bear viewing or photography would be superior recreation 
activities in place of the proposed hunting opportunity. We received 
two comments in support of the bear hunt. One of the supportive 
comments also expressed opposition to the lead-free ammunition 
requirement for this hunt, citing a lack of evidence for any impacts of 
lead on wildlife.
    Our Response: Refuge managers consider predator management 
decisions on a case-by-case basis. As with all species, a refuge 
manager makes a decision about managing predator populations, which are 
included in the category of resident wildlife, including allowing 
predatory species to be hunted, only after careful examination to 
ensure the action would comply with relevant

[[Page 41904]]

laws, policies, and directives. The Administration Act directs the 
Service to manage refuges for biological integrity, diversity, and 
environmental health. Predators play a critical role in the integrity, 
diversity, and overall health of ecosystems, so before allowing 
predators to be hunted, a refuge manager must ensure that these actions 
do not threaten the integrity, diversity, or health of the refuge 
ecosystem. The manager must also determine that the action is 
compatible with the refuge's purposes and the mission of the Refuge 
System and consistent with the refuge's comprehensive conservation plan 
and other step-down plans. In addition, the refuge manager analyzes the 
impacts of the actions on the environment through the NEPA process and 
section 7 of the ESA. Therefore, a refuge manager must take many steps 
to ensure that any opportunity for hunting predators on a refuge meets 
the Service's applicable laws and policies. See our responses to 
Comments (1) and (2), above, for additional discussion of priority 
public uses of refuges identified by law, including hunting, and what 
is necessary before we can open or expand a hunting opportunity.
    The Administration Act also mandates that regulations permitting 
hunting or fishing of fish and resident wildlife within the Refuge 
System shall be, to the extent practicable, consistent with State fish 
and wildlife laws, regulations, and management plans (16 U.S.C. 
668dd(m)). Therefore, all the opportunities for hunting predators in 
this rule that are intended to bring greater consistency with State 
fish and wildlife laws, regulations, and management plans are part of 
realizing the Service's mission. In fact, the NCWRC submitted a comment 
expressing strong support for the proposed bear hunt. See Comment (3), 
above, and our response. All predator hunting determinations and all 
hunting and fishing determinations were made after careful 
consideration by the refuge manager to ensure that such actions would 
not threaten the integrity, diversity, and overall health of the 
ecosystem and the bear population. We have determined that this action 
is compatible with both the purpose of the refuge and the mission of 
the Refuge System.
    The current hunt plan for Pocosin Lakes NWR is designed to ensure 
the black bear population remains a sustainable, renewable wildlife 
resource. Bear sightings on the refuge are common, and the best 
available information indicates that the broader coastal North Carolina 
bear population is healthy, with stable and growing numbers. As of 
2020, the statewide bear population was estimated at 17,200 to 19,200 
bears. The Service has capped the harvest of bears at five for a given 
season. The Service has further limited the time and extent of this 
opportunity by authorizing only one week of hunting within the longer 
State season, only within designated areas of the refuge and only from 
an elevated platform as a means to limit the total harvest of bears. 
These limitations also reduce potential environmental impacts, as 
discussed further in Comment (10), below. In years when the limit of 
five bears is reached before the end of the season, this limitation 
will effectively shorten the season and thereby reduce potential 
environmental impacts and potential for conflict with other 
recreational uses of the refuge. The Service does not expect any 
significant impacts to the bear population from this hunting 
opportunity alone or cumulative impacts from the addition of this 
opportunity to other existing or planned opportunities in the same 
region.
    The Service coordinates closely with the NCWRC to monitor and 
consider the status and health of the bear population in terms of 
demographics in designing hunt plans. NCWRC harvest data indicates that 
stationary or ``still'' hunting, which this opportunity is limited to, 
has lower and less sex-selective (less difference between the harvest 
rates for female and male bears) harvest rates when compared to other 
bear hunting methods. While in the past North Carolina hunters 
selectively targeted male bears, as of 2023, female bears made up 47 
percent of the harvest in coastal North Carolina, representing the most 
balanced harvest reported across the State. Given the short duration of 
the hunt and the cap of five total permits, the Service does not 
anticipate population-level impacts to the sex-ratio of bears in 
coastal North Carolina as a result of this action.
    The current hunt plan is also carefully designed to balance the 
public interest in both quality outdoor recreational hunting and 
healthy wildlife populations for ecosystem health and other 
recreational purposes, such as wildlife observation. The Service is 
aware of several studies showing a correlation between increased 
hunting and decreased wildlife sightings, which underscores the 
importance of the limitations included in the design of this hunting 
opportunity, particularly time and space limitations, to minimize the 
potential for conflict with other recreational uses of the refuge. 
These measures are being taken to ensure a quality experience for all 
visitors to Service-managed lands and waters.
    Safety and encouraging the broadest possible participation in 
hunting opportunities are primary concerns for the Service. Although 
not required by Tyrrell County where the hunt will occur, for the 
safety of people and non-target wildlife, the Service has required the 
use of a raised platform with a minimum elevation of 15 feet for 
hunters who elect to use a centerfire rifle during the bear hunt. 
Shooting from an elevated position directs missed shots downward, 
reducing the likelihood of unintended harm in the relatively flat 
landscape of coastal North Carolina where ammunition can easily travel 
long distances. As part of the guided hunt, the State can provide an 
accessible platform so disabled hunters will be able to participate in 
the hunt safely, with no additional costs to the hunter or the refuge.
    Based on the best available information, there is public support 
for bear hunting and current State management of bear populations more 
generally in North Carolina, according to a 2005 survey conducted by 
the NCWRC. Bear hunting is a traditional activity in the State, 
practiced by families and groups of friends. A large share of the 
public believe it is important that access to bear hunting 
opportunities be maintained. More information on this topic is 
available as part of the supporting documents for the final rule, see 
Docket No. FWS-HQ-NWRS-2025-0031 on <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a>.
    Finally, both the NEPA process and the rulemaking process provide 
the opportunity for the public to provide comments and any additional 
information on impacts of our actions. The information provided in the 
public comment period did not change our conclusion that a limited bear 
hunt on one refuge will have only minor impacts on wildlife 
populations. Additionally, the Service uses an adaptive management 
approach for its hunting programs, reviewing the station programs 
annually with relevant information from monitoring and other relevant 
data, and thus the Pocosin Lakes NWR bear hunting opportunity can be 
revised in the future based on new information, if necessary.
    We did not make any changes to the hunt plan for Pocosin Lakes NWR, 
or to the rule, as a result of these comments.
    Comment (10): We received one comment specifically requesting an 
EIS for changes to the hunting program at Pocosin Lakes NWR and 
expressing concern about analysis of the potential for impacts to 
species listed as

[[Page 41905]]

threatened or endangered under the ESA.
    Our Response: In preparation for this year's rule, Pocosin Lakes 
NWR completed an updated compatibility determination, updated hunt 
plan, an EA to meet NEPA requirements, and an ESA section 7 
consultation to meet ESA requirements. The Service's analysis under 
NEPA found that the changes to the hunting program will not 
significantly impact the environment, including threatened and 
endangered species. The Service's analysis under the ESA found that the 
changes to the hunting program will have either no effect on, or may 
affect, but are not likely to adversely affect, threatened or 
endangered species that could be present on the refuge.
    The analyses specific to the hunt plan for Pocosin Lakes NWR are 
available as part of the supporting documents for the final rule. See 
our responses to Comments (8) and (9), above, for additional discussion 
regarding environmental compliance for the rule and the evaluation 
conducted at the station level for changes to the hunting program at 
Pocosin Lakes NWR, respectively.
    We did not make any changes to the rule as a result of this 
comment.
    Comment (11): We received three comments on the proposed changes at 
Ash Meadows NWR. One comment was generally supportive of the changes. 
Two comments expressed opposition to changes to boating access. These 
two commenters questioned why the change is needed and noted a lack of 
water in Crystal Reservoir and difficulty in accessing open water at 
Peterson Reservoir, due to thick shoreline vegetation.
    Our Response: Conditions at Ash Meadows NWR have changed 
substantially since the previous regulations for hunting and fishing at 
the NWR were finalized. Due to rapid expansion of non-native, aquatic 
invasive species in the West, and the risk of invasive species 
introductions reducing habitat and populations of endemic species, 
recreational boating was determined not an appropriate public use at 
Ash Meadows NWR in 2009. The State of Nevada determined Crystal 
Reservoir dam was in poor condition and at risk of failure in 2012. The 
Nevada Division of Water Resources placed a limit on the height of 
water levels for storage in Crystal Reservoir. With no water control 
mechanism built on Crystal Reservoir during its original construction 
in 1967, and the significant cost estimated to rebuild the dam, the 
only recourse for safety was to reroute water away from Crystal 
Reservoir. Degraded, concrete-lined irrigation ditches further reduced 
inflow to Crystal Reservoir. As a result, it is no longer possible to 
supply or maintain water levels, and Crystal Reservoir is now almost 
entirely dry. As commenters noted, the conditions at Crystal Reservoir 
and Peterson Reservoir no longer support boating, due to both the lack 
of water and poor access.
    For all of the above reasons, Ash Meadows NWR has proposed a rule 
change that removes the use of boats when hunting waterfowl at Crystal 
and Peterson Reservoirs. The change brings obsolete regulations up to 
date to reflect the current appropriate and compatible uses of the 
refuge, better protects aquatic habitats, and corrects the 
misperception that Crystal and Peterson Reservoirs have water and/or 
access to support boating. Restoration of marsh habitat to pre-dam 
conditions is planned, which will hopefully increase waterfowl use and 
provide more hunting opportunities in the future.
    We did not make any changes to the rule as a result of this 
comment.
    Comment (12): We received one comment focused on the proposed minor 
changes to the hunting program at Tamarac NWR. The commenter expressed 
opposition to the lack of early teal hunting opportunity within the 
north migratory bird hunting unit of the refuge and particularly 
expressed concern about negative impacts on the youth waterfowl hunting 
season.
    Our Response: We made no changes to the regulations governing 
Tamarac NWR, but we did amend the hunt plan for the refuge to provide 
additional clarity and transparency for the public regarding the 
administration of waterfowl hunting programs, specific to the early 
teal season. Since the publication of the proposed rule, the State of 
Minnesota has formalized the early teal season that was previously 
experimental in nature. The updated hunt plan accurately reflects the 
boundaries where the early teal season is open on 11,776 acres in the 
southern portion of the refuge, formalized through this final rule. At 
the request of the White Earth Nation, the Service will align with 
State regulations on refuge lands within the boundaries of the White 
Earth Reservation (5,614 acres), which state, ``within the boundaries 
of the White Earth Reservation, the taking of teal during the early-
teal season is prohibited on wild rice waters identified by Tribal 
authorities.'' This action protects a culturally and biologically 
important resource during traditional wild rice harvest. These changes 
will not affect the Minnesota youth waterfowl season. The north 
migratory bird hunting unit will remain open to the other Minnesota 
waterfowl seasons, including the youth waterfowl and regular season 
hunts, providing opportunities for youth hunters to participate in 
waterfowl hunting activities. In total, the refuge currently provides 
17,390 acres for waterfowl hunters to pursue hunting during the regular 
waterfowl season and the youth waterfowl weekend.
    We did not make any changes to the rule as a result of this 
comment.
    Comment (13): We received one comment in support of the opening of 
sport-fishing on North Attleboro NFH. This commenter also expressed 
interest in sport fishing to relocate and stock fish in ponds on 
privately owned land.
    Our Response: Public sport fishing at Pond 2 of the hatchery is 
offered for consumption purposes and is conducted according to laws and 
regulations established and published by the State of Massachusetts, 
including licensing requirements, season dates, fishing methods, and 
harvest, with additional hatchery-specific restrictions. The transfer 
of fish to other ponds requires permits or licenses through the State. 
State regulations are located in title 321 of the Code of Massachusetts 
Regulations (321 CMR 4.00: Fishing).
    We did not make any changes to the rule as a result of this 
comment.

Changes From the Proposed Rule

    As discussed above, under Summary of Comments and Responses, we 
made no changes to these revisions and additions to the CFR based on 
comments we received on the May 15, 2025, proposed rule (90 FR 20600) 
and NEPA documents for individual refuges.
    We are making several minor administrative changes to the 
regulations for Savannah NWR that were intended to be but were 
inadvertently omitted in the proposed regulation promulgation for that 
individual station. These changes, because they were intended 
administrative regulatory changes, were described in the CFR Changes 
Summary Table supporting document provided in the Federal Register 
docket for the proposed rule. These changes were not made in response 
to public comments. We received no public comments concerning these 
changes for Savannah NWR as described in the CFR Summary Table or 
concerning the other regulatory changes that were included, as 
intended, in the proposed rule for Savannah NWR. Additionally, we 
received no public comments concerning the similar administrative 
regulatory changes for other stations in the same administrative 
complex as

[[Page 41906]]

Savannah NWR that were included, as intended, in the proposed rule. 
Thus, we consider these minor administrative changes to be non-
controversial.

Effective Date

    This rule is effective upon the date of its filing at the Office of 
the Federal Register (see DATES, above). We provided a 45-day public 
comment period for the May 15, 2025, proposed rule (90 FR 20600). We 
have determined that any further delay in implementing these station-
specific hunting and sport fishing regulations would not be in the 
public interest and that a delay would hinder the effective planning 
and administration of refuges' hunting and sport fishing programs. This 
rule does not impact the public generally in terms of requiring lead 
time for compliance. Rather, it relieves restrictions in that it allows 
activities on refuges and hatcheries that the Service would otherwise 
prohibit. Therefore, we find good cause under 5 U.S.C. 553(d)(3) and 
808(1) to make this rule effective upon the date of its filing at the 
Office of the Federal Register.

Amendments to Existing Regulations

Revisions and Additions to Hunting and Fishing Opportunities on FWS 
Stations

    This document codifies in the CFR all the Service's hunting and/or 
sport fishing regulations that we are revising or adding since the last 
time we amended these regulations (89 FR 88147; November 7, 2024) and 
that are applicable at Refuge System units and Hatchery System units 
previously opened to hunting and/or sport fishing. This rule better 
informs the general public of the regulations at each station, 
increases understanding and compliance with these regulations, 
increases efficiency in the enforcement of these regulations. The 
Service has strived to align with State hunting and fishing 
regulations; for example, modifications in 2019 removed or simplified 
thousands of regulations to reduce the regulatory burden on the public 
(84 FR 47641; September 10, 2019). The Service is committed to 
continuing to align with State regulations with respect to the use of 
ammunition and/or fishing tackle in future amendments. In addition to 
finding these regulations in 50 CFR parts 32 and 71, visitors to our 
stations may find them reiterated in literature distributed by each 
station or posted on signs. Table 1, below, summarizes the hunting and 
sport fishing openings and expansions that are part of this 2025-2026 
annual update. Tamarac NWR was incorrectly included in the equivalent 
table as part of the proposed annual update, which has been corrected.

                                               Table 1--Changes for 2025-2026 Hunting/Sport Fishing Season
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   Migratory bird
             Station                          State                    hunting        Upland game hunting    Big game hunting         Sport fishing
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Black Coulee NWR.................  Montana....................  O...................  Already Open.......  Already Open.......  Already Closed.
Bowdoin NWR......................  Montana....................  O...................  Already Open.......  Already Closed.....  Already Closed.
Buffalo Lake NWR.................  Texas......................  Already Open........  Already Open.......  E..................  Already Closed.
Creedman Coulee NWR..............  Montana....................  O...................  Already Open.......  Already Open.......  Already Closed.
Eufaula NWR......................  Alabama....................  Already Open........  E..................  Already Open.......  Already Open.
Grasslands WMA *.................  California.................  O...................  O..................  Already Closed.....  Already Closed.
Grays Lake NWR...................  Idaho......................  E...................  Already Closed.....  Already Closed.....  Already Closed.
Hewitt Lake NWR..................  Montana....................  O...................  Already Open.......  Already Open.......  Already Closed.
Laguna Atascosa NWR..............  Texas......................  Already Closed......  Already Closed.....  E..................  Already Open.
Lake Thibadeau NWR...............  Montana....................  O...................  Already Open.......  Already Open.......  Already Closed.
Moosehorn NWR....................  Maine......................  Already Open........  Already Open.......  O..................  Already Open.
North Attleboro NFH..............  Massachusetts..............  Already Closed......  Already Closed.....  Already Closed.....  N.
Pocosin Lakes NWR................  North Carolina.............  Already Open........  Already Open.......  O..................  Already Open.
San Luis NWR.....................  California.................  E...................  Already Open.......  Already Closed.....  Already Open.
Shiawassee NWR...................  Michigan...................  E...................  Already Open.......  Already Open.......  Already Open.
Southern Maryland Woodlands NWR..  Maryland...................  Already Closed......  Already Closed.....  N..................  Already Closed.
Willapa NWR......................  Washington.................  E...................  Already Open.......  E..................  Already Open.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Key:
N = New station opened for the first time.
O = Opening (New species and/or new activity on a station previously open to other activities).
E = Expansion (Station is already open to the activity: the final rule adds new lands/waters, modifies areas open to hunting or fishing, extends season
  dates, adds a targeted hunt, modifies season dates, modifies hunting hours, etc.).
* We consider the changes at Grasslands WMA to be formal openings, rather than opening hunting for the first time. This is because these formal openings
  reflect existing hunts on Grasslands WMA that were opened and administered under the hunt plan for San Luis NWR, an adjacent station within the same
  complex. These formal openings will result in a new opportunity by expanding snipe hunting to additional acres, but the openings are largely an
  administrative change intended to provide greater clarity to the hunting public. This is why, for Grasslands WMA's migratory bird and upland game
  hunting, we use the designation `O' rather than `N' in this table.

    The changes for the 2025-2026 hunting and fishing seasons noted in 
the table above are each based on a complete administrative record 
which, among other detailed documentation, also includes a hunt plan, a 
compatibility determination (for refuges), and the appropriate NEPA 
analysis, all of which were the subject of a public review and comment 
process. The record also includes the appropriate ESA analysis. These 
documents are available upon request.
    Through these openings and expansions, we are opening or expanding 
hunting or fishing on 87,587 acres within the NWRS and the NFHS.

Refuge Name Change

    On March 4, 2025, Executive Order (E.O.) 14229 renamed the Anahuac 
NWR to honor Jocelyn Nungaray. This rule revises the CFR to reflect the 
name change.

Fish Advisory

    For health reasons, anglers should review and follow State-issued 
consumption advisories before enjoying recreational sport fishing 
opportunities on Service-managed waters. You can find information about 
current fish-consumption advisories on the internet at <a href="https://www.epa.gov/choose-fish-and-shellfish-wisely">https://www.epa.gov/choose-fish-and-shellfish-wisely</a>.

[[Page 41907]]

Required Determinations

Regulatory Planning and Review--E.O.s 12866 and 13563

    E.O. 12866 provides that the Office of Information and Regulatory 
Affairs (OIRA) in the OMB will review all significant rules. OIRA has 
determined that this rule is not significant.
    E.O. 13563 reaffirms the principles of E.O. 12866 while calling for 
improvements in the Nation's regulatory system to promote 
predictability, to reduce uncertainty, and to use the best, most 
innovative, and least burdensome tools for achieving regulatory ends. 
E.O. 13563 directs agencies to consider regulatory approaches that 
reduce burdens and maintain flexibility and freedom of choice for the 
public where these approaches are relevant, feasible, and consistent 
with regulatory objectives. E.O. 13563 emphasizes further that 
regulations must be based on the best available science and that the 
rulemaking process must allow for public participation and an open 
exchange of ideas. We have developed this final rule and additions to 
the CFR in a manner consistent with these requirements.

Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.)

    Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA; 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), 
as amended by the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 
1996 (SBREFA; 5 U.S.C. 801 et seq.), whenever a Federal agency is 
required to publish a notice of rulemaking for any proposed or final 
rule, it must prepare and make available for public comment a 
regulatory flexibility analysis that describes the effect of the rule 
on small entities (i.e., small businesses, small organizations, and 
small government jurisdictions). However, no regulatory flexibility 
analysis is required if the head of an agency certifies that the rule 
will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of 
small entities. Thus, for a regulatory flexibility analysis to be 
required, impacts must exceed a threshold for ``significant impact'' 
and a threshold for a ``substantial number of small entities.'' See 5 
U.S.C. 605(b). SBREFA amended the RFA to require Federal agencies to 
provide a statement of the factual basis for certifying that a rule 
will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of 
small entities.
    These revisions and additions to the CFR open or expand hunting or 
fishing on 17 stations. As a result, visitor use for wildlife-dependent 
recreation on these stations will change. If the stations establishing 
new programs were a pure addition to the current supply of those 
activities, it would mean an estimated maximum increase of 189 user 
days (one person per day participating in a recreational opportunity; 
see table 2, below). Because the participation trend is flat in these 
activities, this increase in supply will most likely be offset by other 
sites losing participants. Therefore, this is likely to be a substitute 
site for the activity and not necessarily an increase in participation 
rates for the activity.

                   Table 2--Estimated Maximum Change in Recreation Opportunities in 2025-2026
                                            [Thousands, 2024 dollars]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Additional        Additional        Additional
                          Station                             hunting days      fishing days      expenditures
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Black Coulee NWR..........................................                 0  ................                $0
Bowdoin NWR...............................................                 0  ................                 0
Buffalo Lake NWR..........................................                20  ................                 1
Creedman Coulee NWR.......................................                 0  ................                 0
Eufaula NWR...............................................                 0  ................                 0
Grasslands WMA............................................                 0  ................                 0
Grays Lake NWR............................................                 0  ................                 0
Hewitt Lake NWR...........................................                 0  ................                 0
Laguna Atascosa NWR.......................................                 0  ................                 0
Lake Thibadeau NWR........................................                 0  ................                 0
Moosehorn NWR.............................................                 2  ................                <1
North Attleboro NFH.......................................  ................               156                 5
Pocosin Lakes NWR.........................................                 7  ................                <1
San Luis NWR..............................................                 0  ................                 0
Shiawassee NWR............................................                 2  ................                <1
Southern Maryland Woodlands NWR...........................                 2  ................                <1
Willapa NWR...............................................                 0  ................                 0
                                                           -----------------------------------------------------
    Total.................................................                33               156                 6
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    To the extent visitors spend time and money in the area of the 
station that they would not have spent there anyway, they contribute 
new income to the regional economy and benefit local businesses. Due to 
the unavailability of site-specific expenditure data, we use the 
national estimates from the 2022 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, 
and Wildlife Associated Recreation to identify expenditures for food 
and lodging, transportation, and other incidental expenses. Using the 
average expenditures for these categories with the maximum expected 
additional participation of the Refuge System yields approximately 
$6,000 in recreation-related expenditures (see table 2, above). By 
having ripple effects throughout the economy, these direct expenditures 
are only part of the economic impact of these recreational activities. 
Using a national impact multiplier for hunting activities (2.4) derived 
from the report ``Hunting in America: An Economic Force for 
Conservation'' and for fishing activities (2.3) derived from the report 
``Sportfishing in America'' yields a total maximum economic impact of 
approximately $14,000 (2024 dollars) (Southwick Associates, Inc., 
2024).
    Since we know that most of the fishing and hunting occurs within 
100 miles of a participant's residence, it is unlikely that most of 
this spending will be ``new'' money coming into a local economy; 
therefore, this spending will be offset with a decrease in some other 
sector of the local economy. The net gain to the local economies will 
be no more than $14,000 and likely less. Since

[[Page 41908]]

80 percent of the participants travel less than 100 miles to engage in 
hunting and fishing activities, their spending patterns will not add 
new money into the local economy, and, therefore, the real impact will 
be on the order of about $3,000 annually.
    Small businesses within the retail trade industry (such as hotels, 
gas stations, taxidermy shops, bait-and-tackle shops, and similar 
businesses) may be affected by some increased or decreased station 
visitation. A large percentage of these retail trade establishments in 
the local communities around stations qualify as small businesses (see 
table 3, below). We expect that the incremental recreational changes 
will be scattered, and so we do not expect that the rule will have a 
significant economic effect on a substantial number of small entities 
in any region or nationally. As noted previously, we expect at most 
$14,000 to be spent in total in the stations' local economies. The 
maximum increase will be less than one-tenth of one percent for local 
retail trade spending (see table 3, below). Table 3 does not include 
entries for those stations for which we project no changes in 
recreation opportunities in 2025-2026; see table 2, above.

 Table 3--Comparative Expenditures for Retail Trade Associated With Additional Station Visitation for 2025-2026
                                            [Thousands, 2024 dollars]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Estimated                                    Establishments
                                  Retail trade       maximum      Addition as   Establishments   with fewer than
     Station & county(ies)         in 2017 \1\    addition from    % of total    in 2017 \1\     10 employees in
                                                  new activities                                      2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Buffalo Lake NWR:
    Randall, TX................      $2,340,561              <$1         <0.1              351               237
Moosehorn NWR:
    Washington, ME.............         516,503               <1         <0.1              141                88
North Attleboro NFH:
    Bristol, MA................      11,953,854                5         <0.1            2,147             1,439
Pocosin Lakes NWR:
    Hyde, NC...................          36,521               <1         <0.1               41                38
    Tyrrell, NC................          43,816               <1         <0.1               20                17
    Washington, NC.............         120,827               <1         <0.1               46                35
Shiawassee NWR:
    Saginaw, MI................       4,019,898               <1         <0.1              825               528
Southern Maryland Woodlands
 NWR:
    Anne Arundel, MD...........      11,736,536               <1         <0.1            1,984             1,216
    Calvert, MD................       1,166,179               <1         <0.1              204               137
    Charles, MD................       2,882,128               <1         <0.1              479               281
    Prince George's, MD........      13,034,013               <1         <0.1            2,361             1,482
    St. Mary's, MD.............       1,703,425               <1         <0.1              294               172
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Census Bureau.

    With the small change in overall spending anticipated from this 
action, it is unlikely that a substantial number of small entities will 
have more than a small impact from the spending change near the 
affected stations. Therefore, we certify that this rule will not have a 
significant economic effect on a substantial number of small entities 
as defined under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.). 
A regulatory flexibility analysis is not required. Accordingly, a small 
entity compliance guide is not required.

Congressional Review Act

    These revisions and additions to the CFR, collectively, are not a 
major rule under 5 U.S.C. 804(2), the Congressional Review Act. We 
anticipate no significant employment or small business effects. 
Collectively, the revisions and additions to the CFR:
    a. Will not have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or 
more. The minimal impact will be scattered across the country and will 
most likely not be significant in any local area.
    b. Will not cause a major increase in costs or prices for 
consumers; individual industries; Federal, State, or local government 
agencies; or geographic regions. The opportunities will have only a 
slight effect on the costs of hunting opportunities for Americans. If 
the substitute sites are farther from the participants' residences, 
then an increase in travel costs will occur. The Service does not have 
information to quantify this change in travel cost but assumes that, 
since most people travel less than 100 miles to hunt, the increased 
travel cost will be small. We do not expect these hunting and fishing 
opportunities to affect the supply or demand for hunting or fishing 
opportunities in the United States, and, therefore, it should not 
affect prices for hunting or fishing equipment and supplies, or the 
retailers that sell equipment.
    c. Will not have significant adverse effects on competition, 
employment, investment, productivity, innovation, or the ability of 
U.S.-based enterprises to compete with foreign-based enterprises. The 
additions and revisions to existing opportunities represent only a 
small proportion of recreational spending at NWRs. Therefore, the 
additions and revisions to the CFR will have no measurable economic 
effect on the wildlife-dependent industry, which has annual sales of 
equipment and travel expenditures of $72 billion nationwide.

Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (2 U.S.C. 1501 et seq.)

    Since the revisions and additions to the CFR will apply to public 
use of federally owned and managed refuges, it would not impose an 
unfunded mandate on State, local, or Tribal governments or the private 
sector of more than $100 million per year. The revisions and additions 
will not have a significant or unique effect on State, local, or Tribal 
governments or the private sector. A statement containing the 
information required by the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (2 U.S.C. 1531 
et seq.) is not required.

[[Page 41909]]

Takings--E.O. 12630

    In accordance with E.O. 12630, the revisions and additions to the 
CFR will not have significant takings implications. The revisions and 
additions will affect only visitors to NWRs and NFHs and will describe 
what they can do while they are on a Service station.

Federalism--E.O. 13132

    As discussed under Regulatory Planning and Review and Unfunded 
Mandates Reform Act, above, the revisions and additions to the CFR 
would not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the 
preparation of a federalism summary impact statement under E.O. 13132. 
In preparing these revisions and additions to the CFR, we worked with 
State governments.

Civil Justice Reform--E.O. 12988

    In accordance with E.O. 12988, the Department of the Interior has 
determined that these revisions and additions to the CFR would not 
unduly burden the judicial system and that it meets the requirements of 
sections 3(a) and 3(b)(2) of the E.O.

Energy Supply, Distribution or Use--E.O. 13211

    On May 18, 2001, the President issued E.O. 13211 on regulations 
that significantly affect energy supply, distribution, or use. E.O. 
13211 requires agencies to prepare statements of energy effects when 
undertaking certain actions. Because these revisions and additions 
would open or expand hunting at 17 NWRS and NFHS stations, the 
revisions and additions are not collectively a significant regulatory 
action under E.O. 12866, and we do not expect it to significantly 
affect energy supplies, distribution, or use. Therefore, this action is 
not a significant energy action, and no statement of energy effects is 
required.

Consultation and Coordination With Indian Tribal Governments--E.O. 
13175

    In accordance with E.O. 13175, we have evaluated possible effects 
on federally recognized Indian Tribes and have determined that there 
are no effects. We coordinate recreational use on NWRs and NFHs with 
Tribal governments having adjoining or overlapping jurisdiction before 
we propose the regulations.

Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.)

    This rule contains existing and new collections of information. All 
information collections require approval by the Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA; 44 
U.S.C. 3501 et seq.). An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a 
person is not required to respond to, a collection of information 
unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. The OMB has 
reviewed and approved the information collection requirements 
associated with hunting and sport fishing activities across the 
National Wildlife Refuge System and National Fish Hatchery System and 
assigned the following OMB control numbers:
    <bullet> 1018-0140, ``Hunting and Sport Fishing Application Forms 
and Activity Reports for National Wildlife Refuges, 50 CFR 25.41, 
25.43, 25.51, 26.32, 26.33, 27.42, 30.11, 31.15, 32.1 to 32.72'' 
(Expires 09/30/2025, and in accordance with 5 CFR 1320.10, an agency 
may continue to conduct or sponsor this collection of information while 
the submission is pending at OMB),
    <bullet> 1018-0102, ``National Wildlife Refuge Special Use Permit 
Applications and Reports, 50 CFR 25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, & 36'' 
(Expires 08/31/2025, and in accordance with 5 CFR 1320.10, an agency 
may continue to conduct or sponsor this collection of information while 
the submission is pending at OMB),
    <bullet> 1018-0135, ``Electronic Federal Duck Stamp Program'' 
(Expires 06/30/2028),
    <bullet> 1018-0093, ``Federal Fish and Wildlife Permit Applications 
and Reports-Management Authority; 50 CFR 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 22, 23'' 
(Expires 12/31/2026), and
    <bullet> 1024-0252, ``The Interagency Access Pass and Senior Pass 
Application Processes'' (Expires 10/31/2027).
    In accordance with the PRA and its implementing regulations at 5 
CFR 1320.8(d)(1), we provide the general public and other Federal 
agencies with an opportunity to comment on our proposed revision to OMB 
Control Number 1018-0140. This input will help us assess the impact of 
our information collection requirements and minimize the public's 
reporting burden. It will also help the public understand our 
information collection requirements and provide the requested data in 
the desired format.
    The existing and new reporting and/or recordkeeping requirements 
identified below require approval by OMB:
    Form 3-2358, ``Sport Fishing-Shrimping-Crabbing Permit 
Application''--Form 3-2358 collects the following information:
    <bullet> Date of application: We often have application deadlines, 
and this information helps staff determine the order in which we 
received the applications. It also ensures that the information is 
current.
    <bullet> State fishing license number: We ask for this information 
to verify the applicant is legally licensed by the State (where 
required).
    <bullet> Permit type: On sport fishing permits, we ask what type of 
activity (crabbing, shrimping, crabbing, frogging, etc.) is being 
applied for.
    <bullet> Applicant information: We collect name, address, phone 
number(s), and email so we can contact the applicant/permittee either 
during the application process or after receiving a permit.
    <bullet> Signature and date: To confirm that the applicant (and 
parent/guardian, if a youth hunter) understands the terms and 
conditions of the permit.
    Form 3-2405 ``Self-Clearing Check-In/Out Permit''--Form 3-2405 has 
three parts:
    <bullet> Self-Clearing Daily Check-in Permit. Each user completes 
this portion of the form (date of visit, name, and telephone numbers) 
and deposits it in the permit box prior to engaging in any activity on 
the refuge.
    <bullet> Self-Clearing Daily Visitor Registration Permit. Each user 
must complete the front side of the form (date, name, city, State, zip 
code, and purpose of visit) and carry this portion while on the refuge. 
At the completion of the visit, each user must complete the reverse 
side of the form (number of hours on refuge, harvest information 
(species and number), harvest method, angler information (species and 
number), and wildlife sighted (e.g., black bear and hog)) and deposit 
it in the permit box.
    <bullet> Self-Clearing Daily Vehicle Permit. The driver and each 
user traveling in the vehicle must complete this part and display in 
clear view in the vehicle while on the refuge.
    Form 3-2405 collects:
    <bullet> Information on the visitor (name, address, and contact 
information). We use this information to identify the visitor or 
driver/passenger of a vehicle while on the refuge. This is extremely 
valuable information should visitors become lost or injured. Law 
enforcement officers can easily check vehicles for these cards in order 
to determine a starting point for the search or to contact family 
members in the event of an abandoned vehicle. Having this information 
readily available is critical in a search and rescue situation.
    <bullet> Purpose of visit (hunting, sport fishing, wildlife 
observation, wildlife photography, auto touring, birding,

[[Page 41910]]

hiking, boating/canoeing, visitor center, special event, environmental 
education class, volunteering, other recreation). This information is 
critical in determining public use participation in wildlife management 
programs. This not only allows the refuge to manage its hunt and other 
visitor use programs, but also to increase and/or improve facilities 
for non-consumptive uses that are becoming more popular on refuges. 
Data collected will also help managers better allocate staff and 
resources to serve the public as well as develop annual performance 
measures.
    <bullet> Total number of hunt days on the refuge (at the conclusion 
of their hunting activities). Refuge management will use this 
information to monitor and evaluate hunt quality and resource impacts.
    <bullet> Success of harvest by hunters/anglers (number and type of 
harvest/caught). This information is critical to wildlife management 
programs on refuges. Each refuge will customize the form by listing 
game species and incidental species available on the refuge, hunting 
methods allowed, and data needed for certain species (e.g., for deer, 
whether it's a buck or doe and the number of points; or for turkeys, 
the weight and beard and spur lengths).
    <bullet> Whether or not visitors observed black bear or hogs, for 
example. This information will help managers develop annual performance 
measures for hog removal, and it provides information to help develop 
resource management planning.
    <bullet> Photograph of animal harvested (specific refuges only). 
This requirement documents the sex of animal prior to the hunter being 
eligible to harvest the opposite sex (where allowed).
    <bullet> Date of visit and/or area visited.
    <bullet> Comments. We encourage visitors to comment on their 
experience.
    Form 3-2439, ``Hunting Application/Permit''--Form 3-2439 collects 
the following information:
    <bullet> Lottery application: Refuges who administer hunting via a 
lottery system use Form 3-2439 as the lottery application. If the 
applicant is successful, the completed Form 3-2439 also serves as their 
permit application, avoiding a duplication of burden on the public 
filling out two separate forms.
    <bullet> Date of application: We often have application deadlines, 
and this information helps staff determine the order in which we 
received the applications. It also ensures that the information is 
current.
    <bullet> Methods: Some refuges hold multiple types of hunts (i.e. 
archery, shotgun, primitive weapons, etc). We ask for this information 
to identify which opportunity(ies) a hunter is applying for.
    <bullet> Species permit type: Some refuges allow only certain 
species, such as moose, elk, or bighorn sheep, to be hunted. We ask 
hunters to identify which species hunt they are applying for.
    <bullet> Applicant information: We collect name, address, phone 
number(s), and email so we can contact the applicant/permittee either 
during the application process, when the applicant is successful in a 
lottery drawing, or after receiving a permit.
    <bullet> Party members: Some refuges allow the permit applicant to 
include additional hunters in their group. We collect the names of all 
additional hunters, when allowed by the refuge.
    <bullet> Parent/Guardian contact information: We collect name, 
relationship, address, phone number(s), and email for a parent/guardian 
of youth hunters. We ask for this information in the event of an 
emergency.
    <bullet> Date: We ask hunters for their preferences for hunt dates.
    <bullet> Hunt/Blind location: We ask hunters for their preferences 
for hunt units, areas, or blinds.
    <bullet> Special hunts: Some refuges hold special hunts for youth, 
hunters who are disabled, or other underserved populations. We ask 
hunters to identify if they are applying for these special hunts. For 
youth hunts, we ask for the age of the hunter at the time of the hunt.
    <bullet> Signature and date: To confirm that the applicant (and 
parent/guardian, if a youth hunter) understands the terms and 
conditions of the permit.
    <bullet> Disabled hunts: Some refuges provide an option to allow 
mobility-impaired applicants to reserve specific hunting blinds upon 
providing proof of disability. The refuge will not retain the proof of 
disability. The documentation will be shredded upon approval of the 
blind reservation.
    Form 3-2542, ``Hunter Harvest Report''--Form 3-2542 collects the 
following information:
    <bullet> State-issued hunter identification (ID)/license number. 
(Note: Refuges/hatcheries who rely on the State agency to issue hunting 
permits are not required to collect the permittee's personal 
identifying information (PII) on the harvest form. Those refuges/
hatcheries may opt to collect only the State ID number assigned to the 
hunter in order to match harvest data with their issued permit. 
Refuges/hatcheries will collect either hunter PII or State-issued ID 
number, but not both.)
    <bullet> Species observed--Data will be used by refuge/hatchery 
staff to document the presence of rare or unusual species.
    <bullet> Permit number/type--Data will be used to link the harvest 
report to the issued permit.
    <bullet> Hunt tag number--Data will be used to link the harvest 
report to the species-specific hunt tag.
    <bullet> Number of youth (younger than age 18) in party--Data will 
be used to better understand volume of youth hunting on a refuge/
hatchery. Specific hunter names are not collected, just total number of 
youths in hunting party.
    <bullet> Harvested by--Data will be used to determine ratio of 
adults to youth hunters. Specific hunter names are not collected.
    <bullet> Species observed--Data will be used by a refuge/hatchery 
to determine the presence of any unusual species (e.g., endangered or 
threatened species, or invasive species).
    Labeling/Marking Requirements--As a condition of the permit, some 
refuges require permittees to label hunting and/or sport fishing gear 
used on the refuge. This equipment may include items such as the 
following: tree stands, blinds, or game cameras; hunting dogs 
(collars); flagging/trail markers; boats; and/or sport fishing 
equipment such as jugs, trotlines, and crawfish or crab traps. Refuges 
require the owner label their equipment with their last name, the 
State-issued hunting/fishing license number, and/or hunting/fishing 
permit number. Refuges may also require equipment for youth hunters 
include ``YOUTH'' on the label. This minimal information is necessary 
in the event the refuge needs to contact the owner.
    Required Notifications--On occasion, hunters may find their game 
has landed outside of established hunting boundaries. In this 
situation, hunters must notify an authorized refuge employee to obtain 
consent to retrieve the game from an area closed to hunting or entry 
only upon specific consent. Certain refuges also require hunters to 
notify the refuge manager when hunting specific species (e.g., black 
bear, bobcat, or eastern coyote) with trailing dogs. Refuges 
encompassing privately owned lands, referred to as ``easement overlay 
refuges,'' may also require the hunter obtain written or oral 
permission from the landowner prior to accessing the land.
    Proposed Revisions--With this submission, we will request OMB 
approval of the revisions to OMB Control No. 1018-0140 as described 
below:
    1. Updates to Form 3-2439, ``Hunting Application/Permit''--With the 
submission, we propose to incorporate the fields listed below from the

[[Page 41911]]

Mentored Hunt Application (no form number assigned), which is currently 
approved under OMB Control No. 1018-0191, Lenape NWR Complex Mentored 
Hunt Application, into the currently approved Form 3-2439, ``Hunting 
Application/Permit.'' The Service requires all mentored hunt 
participants to sign the Service's ``USFWS Release and Waiver of 
Liability,'' as well as a Form 3-2260, ``Agreement for Use of Likeness 
in Audio/Visual Products,'' when they are on the Refuge.
    <bullet> Emergency contact (name and phone number);
    <bullet> Applicant hunting history, such as:
    <bullet> Whether applicant has completed a basic hunter education 
course;
    <bullet> Whether applicant has purchased a hunting license, and if 
yes, when;
    <bullet> Previous hunting experience;
    <bullet> Previous participation in a mentored hunt program;
    <bullet> Interest in hunting;
    <bullet> Family history of hunting;
    <bullet> Whether applicant owns equipment and if yes, type of 
equipment; and
    <bullet> Medical conditions/allergies for program staff to be aware 
of in the event of an emergency.
    The information collected via the application will be used by the 
Service and partners to determine eligibility for the program the 
hunter applies to participate in. Upon OMB approval of this revision at 
the final rule stage, we will discontinue OMB Control No. 1018-0191.
    2. Update Regarding Terms of Clearance--With this submission, we 
are also providing OMB with an update regarding the Terms of Clearance 
they assigned to Control Number 1018-0140 on 09/16/2022 regarding the 
implementation of a single, FedRAMP-certified platform for hunt 
applications. The Service obtained FedRAMP authorization for the 
RecAccess platform. We are also working with a contractor to improve 
services on the <a href="http://Recreation.gov">Recreation.gov</a> platform. However, based on customer 
experience analysis, a mandate to consolidate to one platform would 
adversely affect the customer experience at some sites that offer free 
opportunities to veterans and youth. It would also create a problem for 
some refuges that charge for issued permits, not for each permit 
application. The use of two platforms allows the Service to account for 
the variability in fee models and to continue to offer free and low-
cost options to our customers, as the Service primarily uses permits to 
limit use, not to generate fees.
    3. New IC for Web-Based Permit Application Platforms--With this 
submission, we are also splitting the previously approved burden 
associated with hunting applications into separate information 
collections for hardcopy permit applications and those that are web-
based permit applications on the <a href="http://Recreation.gov">Recreation.gov</a> and <a href="http://RecAccess.com">RecAccess.com</a> 
platforms. The online systems do not collect any information above what 
is currently approved to be collected via the hardcopy version of Form 
3-2439.
    4. Renewal of OMB Control No. 1018-0140: With this submission, we 
are renewing this information collection (current expiration date of 
09/30/2025) for an additional 3 years from the effective date of OMB's 
conclusion of the submission in conjunction with this final rule.
    Copies of the draft forms are available to the public by submitting 
a request to the Service Information Collection Clearance Officer using 
one of the methods identified above in ADDRESSES.
    Title of Collection: Hunting and Fishing Application Forms and 
Activity Reports for National Wildlife Refuges and National Fish 
Hatcheries (50 CFR parts 32 and 71).
    OMB Control Number: 1018-0140.
    Form Numbers: 3-2348, 3-2405, 3-2439, and 3-2542.
    Type of Review: Revision of a currently approved collection.
    Respondents/Affected Public: Individuals/households.
    Total Estimated Number of Annual Respondents: 1,632,055.
    Total Estimated Number of Annual Responses: 1,632,055.
    Estimated Completion Time per Response: Varies from 5 minutes to 30 
minutes, depending on activity.
    Total Estimated Number of Annual Burden Hours: 265,117.
    Respondent's Obligation: Required to obtain or retain a benefit.
    Frequency of Collection: On occasion for applications; annually or 
on occasion for reports.
    Total Estimated Annual Non-Hour Burden Cost: $87,365 (primarily 
associated with application fees at some refuges hunting and/or sport 
fishing).
    On May 15, 2025, we published in the Federal Register (90 FR 20600) 
a proposed rule (RIN 1018-BI01) that announced our intention to request 
OMB approval of the revisions to this collection explained above and 
the simultaneous renewal of OMB Control No. 1018-0140. In that proposed 
rule, we solicited comments for 60 days on the information collections 
in this submission, ending on July 15, 2025. We did not receive any 
public comments regarding the information collections in response to 
that proposed rule.
    As part of our continuing effort to reduce paperwork and respondent 
burdens, and in accordance with 5 CFR 1320.8(d)(1), we invite the 
public and other Federal agencies to comment on any aspect of this 
proposed information collection, including:
    (1) Whether or not the collection of information is necessary for 
the proper performance of the functions of the agency, including 
whether or not the information will have practical utility;
    (2) The accuracy of our estimate of the burden for this collection 
of information, including the validity of the methodology and 
assumptions used;
    (3) Ways to enhance the quality, utility, and clarity of the 
information to be collected; and
    (4) Ways to minimize the burden of the collection of information on 
those who are to respond, including through the use of appropriate 
automated, electronic, mechanical, or other technological collection 
techniques or other forms of information technology, e.g., permitting 
electronic submission of response.
    Comments that you submit in response to the proposed revisions and 
additions to the information collection are a matter of public record. 
Before including your address, phone number, email address, or other 
personal identifying information in your comment, you should be aware 
that your entire comment--including your personal identifying 
information--may be made publicly available at any time. While you can 
ask us in your comment to withhold your personal identifying 
information from public review, we cannot guarantee that we will be 
able to do so.
    Send your written comments and suggestions on this information 
collection by the date indicated in DATES to the Service Information 
Collection Clearance Officer, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, MS: PRB/
PERMA (JAO), 5275 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, VA 22041-3803 (mail); or 
by email to <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#b1f8dfd7deeef2deddddf1d7c6c29fd6dec7"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="6b22050d0434280407072b0d1c18450c041d">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>. Please reference OMB Control Number 
1018-0140 in the subject line of your comments.

Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.)

    We comply with section 7 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as 
amended (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.), when developing comprehensive 
conservation plans and step-down management plans--which includes 
hunting and/or fishing plans--for public use of refuges and hatcheries, 
and prior to implementing any new or revised public recreation program 
on a station as identified in 50 CFR 26.32. We complied with section 7 
for each of the

[[Page 41912]]

stations affected by these openings and expansions of hunting and 
fishing opportunities.

National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.)

    We analyzed these openings and expansions in accordance with the 
criteria of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA; 42 
U.S.C. 4332(C)) and 516 Departmental Manual (DM) 8.
    A categorical exclusion from NEPA documentation applies to 
publication of amendments to station-specific hunting and fishing 
regulations because they are technical and procedural in nature, and 
the environmental effects are too broad, speculative, or conjectural to 
lend themselves to meaningful analysis (516 DM 8). Concerning the 
actions that are the subject of these additions and revisions, we have 
complied with NEPA at the project level when developing each hunting or 
fishing opportunity. This is consistent with the Department of the 
Interior instructions for compliance with NEPA where actions are 
covered sufficiently by an earlier environmental document.
    Prior to the addition of a refuge or hatchery to the list of areas 
open to hunting and fishing in 50 CFR parts 32 and 71, we develop 
hunting and fishing plans for the affected stations. We incorporate 
these hunting and fishing activities in the appropriate station 
comprehensive conservation plan and/or other step-down management 
plans, pursuant to our refuge planning guidance in 602 Fish and 
Wildlife Service Manual (FW) 1, 3, and 4. We prepare these 
comprehensive conservation plans and step-down plans in compliance with 
section 102(2)(C) of NEPA and the Department of Interior's NEPA 
regulations at 43 CFR part 46. We invite the affected public to 
participate in the review, development, and implementation of these 
plans. Copies of all plans and NEPA compliance are available upon 
request.

Available Information for Specific Stations

    More information about the Service's hunting and fishing programs 
is available online, including an interactive map of hunting and 
fishing opportunities. Hunting information is available at <a href="https://www.fws.gov/initiative/hunting/hunting-us-fish-and-wildlife-service-lands-and-waters">https://www.fws.gov/initiative/hunting/hunting-us-fish-and-wildlife-service-lands-and-waters</a> and <a href="https://www.fws.gov/library/collections/hunting">https://www.fws.gov/library/collections/hunting</a>. 
Sport fishing information is available at <a href="https://www.fws.gov/activity/fishing">https://www.fws.gov/activity/fishing</a>.
    Individual refuge and hatchery offices also have more detailed 
information about public use programs and conditions that apply to 
their specific programs and maps of their respective areas. To find 
contact information for the appropriate Service office, you may locate 
the office on an interactive map at <a href="https://www.fws.gov/locations">https://www.fws.gov/locations</a>.

Primary Author

    Christian Myers, Division of Natural Resources and Conservation 
Planning, National Wildlife Refuge System, is the primary author of 
this document.

Regulation Summary Table

    The regulatory amendments set forth below are presented alongside 
existing station-specific regulations that have not been amended. For a 
table that provides additional clarity on which specific regulatory 
provisions have been amended, please see Docket No. FWS-HQ-NWRS-2025-
0031 on <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a> for a separate document containing 
a table that provides additional clarity on which specific regulatory 
provisions have been amended and how they have been amended.

List of Subjects

50 CFR Part 32

    Fishing, Hunting, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, 
Wildlife, Wildlife refuges.

50 CFR Part 71

    Fish, Fishing, Hunting, Wildlife.

Regulation Promulgation

    For the reasons described in the preamble, we amend title 50, 
chapter I, subchapters C and E of the CFR as set forth below:

PART 32--HUNTING AND FISHING

0
1. The authority citation for part 32 continues to read as follows:

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 16 U.S.C. 460k, 664, 668dd-668ee, and 
715i; Pub. L. 115-20, 131 Stat. 86.


0
2. Amend Sec.  32.7 by revising and republishing paragraphs (e), (t), 
and (qq) to read as follows:


Sec.  32.7  What refuge units are open to hunting and/or sport fishing?

* * * * *
    (e) California. (1) Cibola National Wildlife Refuge.
    (2) Clear Lake National Wildlife Refuge.
    (3) Colusa National Wildlife Refuge.
    (4) Delevan National Wildlife Refuge.
    (5) Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge.
    (6) Grasslands Wildlife Management Area.
    (7) Havasu National Wildlife Refuge.
    (8) Humboldt Bay National Wildlife Refuge.
    (9) Imperial National Wildlife Refuge.
    (10) Kern National Wildlife Refuge.
    (11) Lower Klamath National Wildlife Refuge.
    (12) Marin Islands National Wildlife Refuge.
    (13) Merced National Wildlife Refuge.
    (14) Modoc National Wildlife Refuge.
    (15) Sacramento National Wildlife Refuge.
    (16) Sacramento River National Wildlife Refuge.
    (17) Salinas River National Wildlife Refuge.
    (18) San Diego National Wildlife Refuge.
    (19) San Diego Bay National Wildlife Refuge.
    (20) San Luis National Wildlife Refuge.
    (21) San Pablo Bay National Wildlife Refuge.
    (22) Sonny Bono Salton Sea National Wildlife Refuge.
    (23) Stone Lakes National Wildlife Refuge.
    (24) Sutter National Wildlife Refuge.
    (25) Tule Lake National Wildlife Refuge.
* * * * *
    (t) Maryland. (1) Blackwater National Wildlife Refuge.
    (2) Eastern Neck National Wildlife Refuge.
    (3) Patuxent Research Refuge.
    (4) Southern Maryland Woodlands National Wildlife Refuge.
* * * * *
    (qq) Texas. (1) Aransas National Wildlife Refuge.
    (2) Balcones Canyonlands National Wildlife Refuge.
    (3) Big Boggy National Wildlife Refuge.
    (4) Brazoria National Wildlife Refuge.
    (5) Buffalo Lake National Wildlife Refuge.
    (6) Caddo Lake National Wildlife Refuge.
    (7) Hagerman National Wildlife Refuge.
    (8) Jocelyn Nungaray National Wildlife Refuge.
    (9) Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge.
    (10) Lower Rio Grande Valley National Wildlife Refuge.
    (11) McFaddin National Wildlife Refuge.
    (12) Muleshoe National Wildlife Refuge.
    (13) Neches River National Wildlife Refuge.
    (14) San Bernard National Wildlife Refuge.

[[Page 41913]]

    (15) Texas Point National Wildlife Refuge.
    (16) Trinity River National Wildlife Refuge.
* * * * *

0
3. Amend Sec.  32.20 by revising and republishing paragraph (d) to read 
as follows:


Sec.  32.20   Alabama.

* * * * *
    (d) Eufaula National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of mourning dove and Eurasian-collared dove, 
duck, and goose on designated areas of the refuge subject to the 
following conditions:
    (i) You must possess and carry a signed refuge hunt permit (signed 
brochure) when hunting.
    (ii) All youth hunters (ages 10 through 15) must remain within 
sight and normal voice contact of a properly licensed hunting adult age 
21 or older. Youth hunters must possess and carry verification of 
passing a State-approved hunter education course. One adult may 
supervise no more than two youth hunters.
    (iii) All waterfowl hunting opportunities are spaced-blind and 
assigned by lottery. Hunters wishing to participate in our waterfowl 
hunt must submit a Waterfowl Lottery Application (FWS Form 3-2439, Hunt 
Application--National Wildlife Refuge System).
    (iv) Hunters must remove all stands/blinds and other personal 
property at the end of each day's hunt (see Sec.  27.93 of this 
chapter).
    (v) We allow access to the refuge for hunting from 1\1/2\ hours 
before legal sunrise to 1\1/2\ hours after legal sunset.
    (vi) We prohibit organized drives. We define a ``drive'' as an 
organized or planned effort to pursue, drive, chase, or otherwise 
frighten or cause game to move in the direction of any person(s) who is 
part of the organized or planned hunt and known to be waiting for the 
game.
    (vii) We prohibit hunting or observing from an elevated stand 
without use of a full body harness.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of gray squirrel and 
rabbit on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following 
conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (d)(1)(i), (ii) and (v) 
through (vii) of this section apply.
    (ii) We allow only shotguns and State-designated archery equipment 
as means of take for upland game hunting.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer and 
feral hog on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following 
conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (d)(1)(i) and (v) 
through (vii) of this section apply.
    (ii) We allow youth gun hunting opportunities that are spaced-blind 
and assigned by lottery. Hunters wishing to participate in our youth 
gun hunt must submit a Big/Upland Game Hunt Application (FWS Form 3-
2439, Hunt Application--National Wildlife Refuge System).
    (iii) All youth hunters must remain within sight and normal voice 
contact of a properly hunting-licensed adult age 21 or older. Youth 
hunters must possess and carry verification of passing a State-approved 
hunter education course. One adult may supervise no more than one youth 
hunter.
    (iv) All big game hunting opportunities, except for youth gun, are 
archery-only.
    (v) We close those portions of the refuge between Bustahatchee and 
Rood Creeks to archery hunting until November 1.
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing, including bowfishing, in 
designated areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow shoreline access for fishing from 1 hour before legal 
sunrise to 1 hour after legal sunset.
    (ii) We prohibit taking frog or turtle on all refuge lands and 
waters (see Sec.  27.21 of this chapter).
    (iii) We adopt reciprocal license agreements between Alabama and 
Georgia for fishing in Lake Eufaula. Anglers fishing in waters not 
directly connected to Lake Eufaula must be properly licensed for the 
State in which they are fishing.
* * * * *

0
4. Amend Sec.  32.24 by:
0
a. Redesignating paragraphs (f) through (x) as paragraphs (g) through 
(y), respectively;
0
b. Adding new paragraph (f); and
0
c. Revising and republishing newly redesignated paragraphs (r) and (t).
    The addition and revisions read as follows:


Sec.  32.24  California.

* * * * *
    (f) Grasslands Wildlife Management Area--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of goose, duck, coot, moorhen, and snipe on 
designated areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) You may not possess more than 25 shot shells while in the field 
once you have left your assigned parking lot. On the Freitas Units, you 
may not possess more than 25 shot shells once you are in the field.
    (ii) You must return your permits (State-issued) to the check 
stations immediately upon completion of your hunt and prior to using 
any tour routes or leaving the refuge vicinity.
    (iii) We restrict hunters in the spaced blind area to their 
assigned blind except when they are placing decoys, traveling to and 
from the parking area, retrieving downed birds, or pursuing crippled 
birds.
    (iv) We restrict hunters in the spaced zone area of the East Bear 
Creek Unit and West Bear Creek Unit to their assigned zone except when 
they are traveling to and from the parking area, retrieving downed 
birds, or pursuing crippled birds.
    (v) Access to the Freitas Unit free-roam hunting area is by boat 
only. We prohibit air-thrust and inboard water-thrust boats.
    (vi) We require State-issued Type A area permits for accessing the 
Freitas Unit on Wednesdays, Saturdays, and Sundays.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of pheasant on designated 
areas of the refuge.
    (3)-(4) [Reserved]
* * * * *
    (r) San Diego National Wildlife Refuge--(1) [Reserved]
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of quail, mourning and 
white-winged dove, spotted and ringed turtle dove, Eurasian collared-
dove, brush rabbit, cottontail rabbit, and jackrabbit on designated 
areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) Archery hunting of quail is limited to September 1 to the 
closing date established by the California Department of Fish and 
Wildlife (CDFW).
    (ii) Hunting of brush rabbit and cottontail rabbit is limited to 
September 1 to the closing date established by the CDFW.
    (iii) Hunting of Eurasian collared-dove and jackrabbit is limited 
to September 1 to the last day of February.
    (iv) We allow shotguns and archery only. Falconry is prohibited.
    (v) We allow the use of dogs when hunting upland game.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of mule deer on designated 
areas of the refuge.
    (4) [Reserved]
* * * * *
    (t) San Luis National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of goose, duck, coot, moorhen, and snipe on 
designated areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) You may not possess more than 25 shot shells while in the field 
once you

[[Page 41914]]

have left your assigned parking lot. On the Freitas Units, you may not 
possess more than 25 shot shells once you are in the field.
    (ii) You must return your permits (State-issued) to the check 
stations immediately upon completion of your hunt and prior to using 
any tour routes or leaving the refuge vicinity.
    (iii) We restrict hunters in the spaced blind area to their 
assigned blind except when they are placing decoys, traveling to and 
from the parking area, retrieving downed birds, or pursuing crippled 
birds.
    (iv) We restrict hunters in the spaced zone area of the East Bear 
Creek Unit and West Bear Creek Unit to their assigned zone except when 
they are traveling to and from the parking area, retrieving downed 
birds, or pursuing crippled birds.
    (v) Access to the Freitas Unit free-roam hunting area is by boat 
only. We prohibit air-thrust and inboard water-thrust boats.
    (vi) We require State-issued Type A area permits for accessing the 
Freitas Unit on Wednesdays, Saturdays, and Sundays.
    (vii) We prohibit the use of motorized boats and other flotation 
devices in the free-roam units with the exception of the Freitas Unit.
    (viii) We prohibit vehicle trailers of any type or size to be in 
the refuge hunt areas at any time or to be left unattended at any 
location on the refuge.
    (ix) We allow the use of dogs when hunting.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of pheasant on designated 
areas of the refuge.
    (3) [Reserved]
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We only allow fishing during normal refuge visitation hours in 
designated areas as posted.
    (ii) We only allow the use of pole and line or rod and reel to take 
fish, and anglers must attend their equipment at all times.
* * * * *

0
5. Amend Sec.  32.29 by revising and republishing paragraphs (b), (e), 
(h), and (i) to read as follows:


Sec.  32.29   Georgia.

* * * * *
    (b) Blackbeard Island National Wildlife Refuge--(1)-(2) [Reserved]
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer and 
feral hog on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following 
conditions:
    (i) We require a refuge hunt permit (electronic form) for all 
hunters age 16 and older.
    (ii) Each hunter may place one stand on the refuge no earlier than 
one month prior to the opening day of each hunt but must remove the 
stand by the end of each hunt (see Sec.  27.93 of this chapter).
    (iii) Only permitted hunters may camp at the designated camping 
area during refuge hunts.
    (iv) For hunting, we allow only bows as governed by State 
regulations.
    (v) Hunters may take five deer (no more than two antlered).
    (vi) We allow mooring of boats to the government dock only for 
loading and unloading purposes.
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow fishing on designated areas of the 
refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow saltwater fishing year-round in the estuarine waters 
adjacent to the refuge.
    (ii) We allow bank/beach saltwater fishing into estuarine waters 
only from legal sunrise to legal sunset except during managed hunts.
* * * * *
    (e) Harris Neck National Wildlife Refuge--(1)-(2) [Reserved]
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer and 
feral hog on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following 
conditions:
    (i) We require a refuge hunt permit (electronic form) for all 
hunters age 16 and older.
    (ii) Each hunter may place one stand on the refuge during the week 
preceding each hunt but must remove the stand by the end of each hunt 
(see Sec.  27.93 of this chapter).
    (iii) We prohibit hunting within 100 yards (91 meters) of Harris 
Neck Road, the refuge entrance drive, Visitor Contact Station/Office, 
Barbour River Landing, Barbour River Road, or Gould's Cemetery.
    (iv) Hunters may take five deer (no more than two antlered).
    (v) During the gun hunt, we allow only shotguns (20 gauge or 
larger), muzzleloaders, bows, air rifles (.30 caliber or larger), and 
air bows, as governed by State regulations. We prohibit the use of 
centerfire rifles and prohibit the use of buckshot.
    (vi) We allow the incidental take of armadillo, feral hog, and 
coyote during any refuge hunt with the weapons legal for that hunt, 
subject to applicable State seasons and regulations. There is no bag 
limit for these species.
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow saltwater fishing year-round in the estuarine waters 
adjacent to the refuge.
    (ii) We allow bank fishing into estuarine waters only from legal 
sunrise to legal sunset except during managed hunts.
    (iii) We prohibit freshwater fishing.
* * * * *
    (h) Savannah National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of waterfowl and mourning dove on designated 
areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We require a refuge hunt permit (electronic form) for all 
hunters age 16 and older.
    (ii) You may take feral hog and coyote during all refuge hunts with 
weapons authorized and legal for those hunts.
    (iii) We allow the incidental take of armadillo, beaver, opossum, 
and raccoon during all refuge hunts with firearms and other equipment 
authorized for use on refuge lands in Georgia only.
    (iv) We allow the use of dogs for retrieving migratory birds.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of squirrel and rabbit on 
designated areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (h)(1)(i), (iii), and 
(iv) of this section apply.
    (ii) You may not hunt on or within 100 yards (90 meters) of public 
roads, refuge facilities, roads and trails, and railroad rights-of-way, 
or in closed areas.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer, 
turkey, alligator, feral hog, and coyote on designated areas of the 
refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (h)(1)(i), (ii), and 
(iii) and (h)(2)(ii) of this section apply.
    (ii) You may only use bows, as governed by State regulations, for 
deer, feral hog, and coyote hunting during the archery hunt for these 
species.
    (iii) You may only use shotguns (20 gauge or larger), centerfire 
rifles, centerfire pistols, muzzleloaders, and bows, as governed by 
State regulations, for deer, feral hog, and coyote hunting during the 
firearm hunts for these species.
    (iv) Hunters may take five deer (no more than two antlered).
    (v) We allow only shotguns with approved nontoxic #2 shot or 
smaller, and bows, as governed by State regulations, for turkey 
hunting.
    (vi) We prohibit the use of buckshot
    (vii) We prohibit catch-and-release of alligators.

[[Page 41915]]

    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) Anglers may fish in refuge impoundments and canals from March 1 
through November 30 annually.
    (ii) Anglers may fish in Kingfisher Pond and all tidal creeks year-
round.
    (iii) We allow fishing from legal sunrise to legal sunset.
    (iv) Anglers may bank fish year-round throughout the refuge, unless 
otherwise posted.
    (v) Anglers may only use nonmotorized boats and boats with electric 
motors within impounded waters.
    (i) Wassaw National Wildlife Refuge--(1)-(2) [Reserved]
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer and 
feral hog on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following 
conditions:
    (i) We require a refuge hunt permit (electronic form) for all 
hunters age 16 and older.
    (ii) Hunters may take five deer (no more than two antlered).
    (iii) We prohibit the use of buckshot.
    (iv) We allow mooring of boats to the government dock only for 
loading or unloading purposes.
    (v) We allow only permitted hunters to camp at the designated 
camping area while participating in refuge hunts.
    (vi) Each hunter may place one stand on the refuge no earlier than 
one month prior to the opening day of each hunt, but you must remove 
all stands by the end of each hunt (see Sec.  27.93 of this chapter).
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow saltwater fishing year-round in the estuarine waters 
adjacent to the refuge.
    (ii) We allow bank/beach fishing into estuarine waters only from 
legal sunrise to legal sunset except during managed hunts.
    (iii) We prohibit freshwater fishing.
* * * * *

0
6. Amend Sec.  32.37 by revising and republishing paragraphs (l), (t), 
and (u) to read as follows:


Sec.  32.37   Louisiana.

* * * * *
    (l) D'Arbonne National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of duck, goose, coot, and woodcock on 
designated areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) You must carry a signed refuge hunt permit (signed public use 
regulations brochure) and must carry and fill out daily a Visitor 
Check-In Permit and Report (FWS Form 3-2405).
    (ii) We allow waterfowl hunting until 12 p.m. (noon) during the 
State season.
    (iii) Hunters may enter the refuge no earlier than 4 a.m. and must 
exit no later than 1:30 p.m.
    (iv) We prohibit hunting within 100 feet (30 meters (m)) of the 
maintained rights-of-way of roads. We prohibit hunting within 50 feet 
(15 m) or trespassing on aboveground oil, gas, or electrical 
transmission facilities.
    (v) Hunters must remove boats, blinds, and decoys from the refuge 
at the end of each day's hunt (see Sec.  27.93 of this chapter).
    (vi) When hunting migratory game birds, you may only use dogs to 
locate, point, and retrieve game.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of squirrel, rabbit, 
raccoon, and opossum on designated areas of the refuge subject to the 
following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (l)(1)(i) and (iv) of 
this section apply.
    (ii) You may enter the refuge no earlier than 4 a.m. and must exit 
no later than 2 hours after legal shooting hours.
    (iii) When hunting upland game, you may only use dogs to locate, 
point, and retrieve game.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer on 
designated areas of the refuge as indicated subject to the following 
conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (l)(1)(i) and (iv) and 
(l)(2)(ii) of this section apply.
    (ii) You must check all deer taken during general gun deer hunts at 
a refuge check station on the same day taken.
    (iii) We prohibit hunters from placing or hunting from stands on 
pine trees with white-painted bands or rings.
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing on the refuge subject to 
the following condition: We prohibit the taking of turtle (see Sec.  
27.21 of this chapter).
* * * * *
    (t) Tensas River National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of duck, goose, rail, gallinule, coot, 
woodcock, and snipe on designated areas of the refuge subject to the 
following conditions:
    (i) All hunters and anglers age 16 and older must purchase an 
Annual Public Use Permit (FWS Form 3-2439). This permit allows 
individuals to participate in open (non-quota) hunting and fishing 
seasons.
    (ii) All hunters and anglers must obtain a Self-Clearing Permit 
(FWS Form 3-2405), available at refuge entry points and at the Visitor 
Center, or utilize electronic check in and check out, and complete the 
self-clearing process when exiting the refuge at the end of each day.
    (iii) We allow hunting of duck, goose, rail, gallinule, coot, and 
snipe on Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays, and Sundays until 2 p.m. 
during the State season. We prohibit migratory bird hunting during 
refuge gun hunts for deer.
    (iv) We allow refuge hunters to enter the refuge no earlier than 4 
a.m., and they must leave no later than 2 hours after legal sunset 
unless they are participating in the refuge nighttime raccoon hunt or 
tracking wounded deer.
    (v) We allow all-terrain vehicle (ATV) travel on designated trails 
for access typically from October 1 to the last day of the refuge 
squirrel season.
    (vi) We prohibit field dressing of game within 150 feet (45 meters) 
of parking areas, maintained roads, and trails.
    (vii) An adult age 18 or older must supervise youth hunters age 17 
and younger during all hunts. One adult may supervise two youths during 
small game and migratory bird hunts but may supervise only one youth 
during big game hunts. Youth must remain within normal voice contact of 
the adult who is supervising them.
    (viii) We allow the incidental take of coyote, beaver, raccoon, 
opossum, feral hog, armadillo, and nutria during authorized hunts with 
firearms and archery equipment legal for use during the hunt.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of raccoon, squirrel, and 
rabbit, and the incidental take of coyote, beaver, raccoon, opossum, 
armadillo, and nutria, on designated areas of the refuge subject to the 
following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (t)(1)(i), (ii), and 
(iv) through (viii) of this section apply.
    (ii) A nighttime raccoon hunt will be conducted during December, 
January, and/or February, usually in conjunction with the adjacent 
State Wildlife Management Area (WMA) raccoon hunting season.
    (iii) We allow the use of dogs when squirrel and rabbit hunting 
subject to the following conditions:
    (A) We allow hunting without dogs from the beginning of the State 
season to December 31.
    (B) From the beginning of the State season to December 31, we do 
not require hunters to wear hunter orange.

[[Page 41916]]

    (C) We allow squirrel and rabbit hunting with or without dogs from 
January 1 to the last day of February.
    (D) From January 1 to the last day of February, squirrel and rabbit 
hunters are required to wear a minimum solid hunter orange cap.
    (E) We allow no more than three dogs per hunting party.
    (iv) We close squirrel and rabbit hunting during the following gun 
hunts for deer: Refuge-wide youth hunt, primitive firearms hunt, and 
modern firearms hunts.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer and 
turkey, and the incidental take of feral hog, on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (t)(1)(i), (ii), and 
(iv) through (viii) of this section apply.
    (ii) We require a valid Quota Firearm Permit (FWS Form 3-2439) to 
hunt during a Deer Quota Firearm Hunt. You must complete and submit an 
application for all Deer Quota Hunts, and hunters will be notified of 
their drawing status. If selected, hunters are required to purchase the 
Annual Public Use Permit (FWS Form 3-2439) to claim their Quota Firearm 
Permit for the selected hunt. Hunters must carry a signed paper copy or 
electronic version of the permit with them on their person while 
hunting.
    (iii) Deer archery season will begin the first Saturday in November 
and will conclude on January 31, except for during the youth gun hunt 
and modern firearms hunts, when archery is prohibited.
    (iv) The deer primitive firearms season will occur between November 
1 and January 31. We allow all legal primitive firearms as governed by 
State regulations.
    (v) During the deer primitive firearms season, hunters may fit any 
legal primitive firearms with magnified scopes.
    (vi) We allow hunters using primitive weapons to hunt reforested 
areas.
    (vii) We prohibit youth hunters from using modern firearms during 
the primitive weapon hunt.
    (viii) We prohibit hunting and/or shooting into or across any 
reforested area during the gun hunts for deer.
    (ix) For the guided quota youth hunts, we consider youth to be ages 
8 through 15.
    (x) We will conduct a refuge-wide youth deer hunt that will 
coincide with the State youth hunt weekend.
    (xi) Hunters may take only one deer (one buck or one doe) per day 
during refuge deer hunts, except that during guided youth and 
wheelchair-bound hunts, the limit will be one antlerless and one 
antlered deer per day.
    (xii) We allow turkey hunting in designated areas during the State 
turkey hunt season not to exceed 16 days.
    (xiii) We allow a youth turkey hunt weekend in conjunction with the 
State youth turkey hunt weekend.
    (xiv) We allow muzzleloader hunters to discharge their primitive 
firearms at the end of each hunt safely into the ground at least 150 
feet (45 meters (m)) from any designated public road, maintained road, 
trail, fire break, dwelling, or aboveground oil and gas production 
facility. We define a ``maintained road or trail'' as one that has been 
mowed, disked, or plowed, or one that is free of trees.
    (xv) We prohibit deer hunters leaving deer stands unattended before 
the opening day of the refuge archery season. Hunters must remove 
stands from the refuge by the end of the last day of the refuge archery 
season (see Sec.  27.93 of this chapter). Hunters must remove portable 
stands from trees at the end of each day's hunt and place freestanding 
stands in a nonhunting position when unattended. Hunters must clearly 
mark stands left unattended on the refuge with the hunter's last name, 
Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries license number, and I-
Sportsman Permit Number.
    (xvi) We allow hunting with slugs, rifle, or pistol ammunition 
larger than .22 caliber rimfire only during the quota hunts for deer. 
We prohibit use of buckshot when hunting.
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (t)(1)(i) and (ii) of 
this section apply.
    (ii) We allow anglers to enter the refuge no earlier than 4 a.m., 
and they must depart no later than 2 hours after legal sunset.
    (iii) We prohibit the taking of turtle (see Sec.  27.21 of this 
chapter).
    (iv) We prohibit fish cleaning within 150 feet (45 m) of parking 
areas, maintained roads, and trails.
    (u) Upper Ouachita National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game 
bird hunting. We allow hunting of duck, goose, coot, dove, rail, 
gallinule, snipe, and woodcock on designated areas of the refuge 
subject to the following conditions:
    (i) You must carry a signed refuge public use brochure and must 
carry and fill out daily a Visitor Check-In Permit and Report (FWS Form 
3-2405).
    (ii) Hunters may only hunt during designated refuge seasons as 
listed in the signed refuge public use brochure.
    (iii) We allow waterfowl hunting until 12 p.m. (noon) during the 
State season. Waterfowl hunters must exit the refuge no later than 1:30 
p.m.
    (iv) Hunters may enter the refuge no earlier than 4 a.m.
    (v) We prohibit hunting within 100 feet (30 meters (m)) of the 
maintained rights-of-way of roads and from or across all-terrain 
vehicle (ATV) trails. We prohibit hunting within 50 feet (15 m) of, or 
trespassing on, aboveground oil, gas, or electrical transmission 
facilities.
    (vi) When hunting migratory game birds, you may only use dogs to 
locate, point, and retrieve.
    (vii) We allow ATVs only on trails designated for their use and 
marked by signs (see Sec.  27.31 of this chapter). ATV trails are 
closed March 1 through August 31.
    (viii) We allow the incidental take of coyote, beaver, and feral 
hog during any refuge hunt with the weapons legal for that hunt, 
subject to applicable State seasons and regulations.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of quail, squirrel, 
rabbit, raccoon, and opossum, and the incidental take of coyote and 
beaver, on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following 
conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (u)(1)(i), (ii), (iv), 
(v), (vii), and (viii) of this section apply.
    (ii) You must exit no later than 2 hours after legal shooting 
hours, unless participating in authorized hunting after legal sunset.
    (iii) We allow the nighttime hunting of raccoon and opossum from 
December 1 to January 31 with the aid of dogs. We allow hunting of 
raccoon and opossum during the daylight hours of rabbit and squirrel 
season.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer and 
turkey, and the incidental take of feral hog, on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (u)(1)(i), (ii), (iv), 
(v), (vii), and (viii), and (u)(2)(ii) of this section apply.
    (ii) Deer hunters must wear hunter orange as governed by State deer 
hunting regulations in wildlife management areas.
    (iii) We prohibit hunters from placing stands or hunting from 
stands on pine trees with white-painted bands and/or rings.
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:

[[Page 41917]]

    (i) We prohibit leaving boats and other personal property on the 
refuge overnight (see Sec.  27.93 of this chapter).
    (ii) You must tend trotlines daily. You must attach ends of 
trotlines by a length of cotton line that extends into the water.
    (iii) We prohibit the taking of turtle (see Sec.  27.21 of this 
chapter).

0
7. Amend Sec.  32.38 by revising and republishing paragraph (c) to read 
as follows:


Sec.  32.38   Maine.

* * * * *
    (c) Moosehorn National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of duck, goose, American woodcock, and snipe 
on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow the use of dogs consistent with State regulations.
    (ii) We allow hunters to enter the refuge one (1) hour before legal 
shooting hours, and they must exit the refuge by one (1) hour past 
legal shooting hours.
    (iii) We only allow portable or temporary blinds and decoys that 
must be removed from the refuge following each day's hunt (see Sec.  
27.93 of this chapter).
    (iv) Hunters must retrieve all species harvested on the refuge.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of bobcat, eastern 
coyote, ruffed grouse, snowshoe hare, red fox, gray and red squirrel, 
raccoon, skunk, porcupine, and woodchuck on designated areas of the 
refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (c)(1)(i), (ii) (except 
for hunters pursuing raccoon and coyote at night), (iii), and (iv) of 
this section apply.
    (ii) We allow hunting for eastern coyote, red squirrel, and 
woodchuck only from October 1 to March 31.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of black bear, moose, 
turkey, and white-tailed deer on designated areas of the refuge subject 
to the following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (c)(1)(i), (ii), and 
(iv) of this section apply.
    (ii) We allow stands, blinds, and ladders to be set up on the 
opening day of the archery deer season. Stands, blinds and ladders may 
not be set up within 50 yards of a road open to motorized vehicles. 
Hunters must clearly label tree stands, blinds, or ladders left on the 
refuge overnight with their State hunting license number and last name. 
Hunters must remove stands, blinds, and ladders from the refuge by the 
last day of the muzzleloader deer season (see Sec.  27.93 of this 
chapter).
    (iii) You may hunt black bear, eastern coyote, and white-tailed 
deer during the State archery and firearms deer seasons on the Baring 
Division east of State Route 191.
    (iv) We prohibit use of firearms to hunt bear during the archery 
deer season on the Baring Division east of Route 191. We prohibit the 
use of firearms, other than a muzzleloader, to hunt coyote during the 
deer muzzleloader season on the Baring Division east of Route 191.
    (v) You may hunt turkey during the State fall turkey season using 
archery equipment only.
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We only allow fishing from \1/2\ hour before legal sunrise to 
\1/2\ hour after legal sunset.
    (ii) We prohibit trapping fish for use as bait.
* * * * *

0
8. Amend Sec.  32.39 by adding paragraph (d) to read as follows:


Sec.  32.39   Maryland.

* * * * *
    (d) Southern Maryland Woodlands National Wildlife Refuge--(1)-(2) 
[Reserved]
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow the hunting of white-tailed deer and 
turkey on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following 
conditions:
    (i) We allow only the use of archery equipment, as defined by the 
State, in designated areas open to hunting.
    (ii) We prohibit organized deer drives. We define a ``deer drive'' 
as an organized or planned effort to pursue, drive, chase, or otherwise 
frighten or cause deer to move in the direction of any person(s) who is 
part of the organized or planned hunt and known to be waiting for the 
deer.
    (4) [Reserved]

0
9. Amend Sec.  32.41 by revising and republishing paragraph (f) to read 
as follows:


Sec.  32.41  Michigan.

* * * * *
    (f) Shiawassee National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of waterfowl (duck and goose), American 
woodcock, American crow, American coot, common gallinule, sora, 
Virginia rail, and Wilson's snipe on designated areas of the refuge 
subject to the following conditions:
    (i) You must possess and carry a refuge check-in card (FWS Form 3-
2405, Self-Clearing Check-in Permit).
    (ii) We allow waterfowl hunting on Saturdays, Sundays, Tuesdays, 
and Thursdays during the regular goose season after September 30 and 
during the State youth waterfowl season.
    (iii) We allow hunter access to the refuge 2 hours before legal 
shooting time to 2 hours after legal shooting time.
    (iv) You may possess no more than 25 shotgun shells while hunting 
in the field.
    (v) We allow the use of dogs while hunting, provided the dog is 
under the immediate control of the hunter at all times.
    (vi) We allow the take of feral hog incidental to other lawful 
hunting using legal methods of take.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of turkey, small game 
(eastern fox squirrel, eastern cottontail, and ring-necked pheasant), 
and furbearers (raccoon, coyote, and red fox) on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (f)(1)(iii) and (vi) of 
this section apply, except we allow hunter access to the refuge for 
furbearer hunting from \1/2\ hour before legal sunrise to \1/2\ hour 
after legal sunset.
    (ii) You may only hunt turkey during the spring season.
    (iii) We allow dogs for hunting. Raccoon hunting dogs must wear 
global positioning system (GPS) or radio collars.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer on 
designated areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (f)(1)(iii) and (vi) of 
this section apply.
    (ii) You must possess and carry a refuge permit (State-issued 
permit).
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow fishing by boat in navigable waterways but not within 
any managed refuge units.
    (ii) We allow bank fishing from legal sunrise to legal sunset only 
at designated sites along the Tittabawassee and Cass Rivers.

0
10. Amend Sec.  32.45 by revising and republishing paragraphs (c), (d), 
(h), (j), and (l) to read as follows:


Sec.  32.45  Montana.

* * * * *
    (c) Black Coulee National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow migratory game bird hunting on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following condition: You must remove all 
boats, decoys, portable blinds, other personal

[[Page 41918]]

property, and any materials brought onto the refuge for blind 
construction by legal sunset each day (see Sec. Sec.  27.93 and 27.94 
of this chapter).
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of pheasant, sharp-tailed 
grouse, sage grouse, gray partridge, fox, and coyote on designated 
areas of the refuge subject to the following condition: Fox and coyote 
hunters may only use centerfire rifles, rimfire rifles, or shotguns 
with approved nontoxic shot (see Sec.  32.2(k)).
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow big game hunting on designated 
portions of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow hunters to leave portable tree stands, portable 
blinds, and freestanding elevated platforms on the refuge from August 
15 through December 15.
    (ii) You must visibly mark portable tree stands, portable blinds, 
and freestanding elevated platforms with your automated licensing 
system (ALS) number.
    (4) [Reserved]
    (d) Bowdoin National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow migratory game bird hunting on designated areas of 
the refuge.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of pheasant, sharp-tailed 
grouse, sage grouse, gray partridge, fox, and coyote on designated 
areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) You must possess and carry a refuge Special Use Permit (FWS 
Form 3-1383-G) to hunt fox and coyote.
    (ii) Fox and coyote hunters may only use centerfire rifles, rimfire 
rifles, or shotguns with approved nontoxic shot (see Sec.  32.2(k)).
    (3)-(4) [Reserved]
* * * * *
    (h) Creedman Coulee National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game 
bird hunting. We allow migratory game bird hunting on designated areas 
of the refuge.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of pheasant, sharp-tailed 
grouse, sage grouse, gray partridge, fox, and coyote on designated 
areas of the refuge.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow big game hunting on designated areas 
of the refuge.
    (4) [Reserved]
* * * * *
    (j) Hewitt Lake National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow migratory game bird hunting on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following condition: You must remove all 
boats, decoys, portable blinds, other personal property, and any 
materials brought onto the refuge for blind construction by legal 
sunset each day (see Sec. Sec.  27.93 and 27.94 of this chapter).
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of pheasant, sharp-tailed 
grouse, sage grouse, gray partridge, fox, and coyote on designated 
portions of the refuge subject to the following condition: Fox and 
coyote hunters may use only centerfire rifles, rim-fire rifles, or 
shotguns with approved nontoxic shot (see Sec.  32.2(k)).
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow big game hunting on designated areas 
of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow hunters to leave portable tree stands, portable 
blinds, and freestanding elevated platforms on the refuge from August 
15 through December 15.
    (ii) You must visibly mark portable tree stands, portable blinds, 
and freestanding elevated platforms with your automated licensing 
system (ALS) number.
    (4) [Reserved]
* * * * *
    (l) Lake Thibadeau National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game 
bird hunting. We allow migratory game bird hunting on designated areas 
of the refuge.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of pheasant, sharp-tailed 
grouse, sage grouse, gray partridge, fox, and coyote on designated 
areas of the refuge.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow big game hunting on designated areas 
of the refuge.
    (4) [Reserved]
* * * * *

0
11. Amend Sec.  32.47 by revising and republishing paragraph (a) to 
read as follows:


Sec.  32.47   Nevada.

* * * * *
    (a) Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of goose, duck, coot, moorhen, snipe, and 
dove on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following 
condition: We open the refuge to the public from 1 hour before legal 
sunrise until 1 hour after legal sunset.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of quail and rabbit on 
designated areas of the refuge subject to the following condition: We 
open the refuge to the public from 1 hour before legal sunrise until 1 
hour after legal sunset.
    (3)-(4) [Reserved]
* * * * *

0
12. Amend Sec.  32.51 by revising and republishing paragraph (e) to 
read as follows:


Sec.  32.51  New York.

* * * * *
    (e) Montezuma National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of waterfowl, Canada goose, snow goose, and 
gallinule on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following 
conditions:
    (i) We allow the use of dogs consistent with State regulations.
    (ii) For the regular waterfowl season and October through January 
season for Canada goose:
    (A) We require daily electronic refuge permits and reservations. We 
require you to check in, check out, and report your harvest each hunt 
day using the designated online platform.
    (B) We allow hunting only on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays 
during the established refuge season set within the State western zone 
season, and during New York State's established special hunts, which 
can occur any day of the week as set by the State. Veteran and active 
military hunters may be accompanied by a non-hunting companion. Youth 
hunters must be accompanied by a qualified guide (qualified guides must 
be of legal hunting age and possess a valid hunting license, Federal 
Migratory Bird Hunting and Conservation Stamp (as known as a ``Federal 
Duck Stamp''), Harvest Information Program (HIP) number, and proof of 
successful completion of a waterfowl identification course as described 
in paragraph (e)(1)(ii)(F) of this section).
    (C) Hunters may not enter the refuge earlier than 5 a.m. and must 
exit the hunt area by 1 p.m.
    (D) We allow motorless boats to hunt waterfowl. We limit hunters to 
one boat per reservation and one motor vehicle in the hunt area per 
reservation. Participants in the New York State youth waterfowl hunt 
may request exceptions to this provision at the discretion of refuge 
staff.
    (E) We prohibit shooting from within 500 feet (152 meters) of the 
Tschache Pool observation tower.
    (F) We require proof of successful completion of the New York State 
waterfowl identification course, the Montezuma nonresident waterfowl 
identification course, or a suitable nonresident State waterfowl 
identification course. All hunters must show proof of successful course 
completion each time they hunt.

[[Page 41919]]

    (G) You may hunt gallinule and Canada goose on refuge areas 
designated for the regular waterfowl season only during the regular 
waterfowl season.
    (iii) For Canada goose in September and snow goose hunting:
    (A) We allow hunting of Canada goose during the New York State 
September season and hunting of snow goose during portions of the New 
York State snow goose season and portions of the period covered by the 
Light Goose Conservation Order.
    (B) You must possess a valid daily hunt permit (FWS Form 3-2542). 
We require you to complete and return the daily hunt permit card by the 
end of the hunt day.
    (C) For snow goose hunting, hunters may enter the refuge/Hunter 
Check Station area no earlier than 4 hours before legal sunrise. For 
Canada goose hunting, hunters may enter the refuge/Hunter Check Station 
area no earlier than 2 hours before legal sunrise.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of rabbit and squirrel on 
designated areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The condition set forth at paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section 
applies.
    (ii) You must possess a valid daily hunt permit (FWS Form 3-2542) 
and are required to complete and return the daily hunt permit card by 
the end of each hunt day.
    (iii) We allow upland game hunters to access the refuge from 2 
hours before legal sunrise until 2 hours after legal sunset.
    (iv) We require the use of approved non-lead shot for upland game 
hunting (see Sec.  32.2(k)).
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer and 
wild turkey on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following 
conditions:
    (i) The condition set forth at paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section 
applies.
    (ii) You must possess a valid daily hunt permit (FWS Form 3-2542). 
We require you to complete and return the daily hunt permit card by the 
end of the hunt day.
    (iii) We allow white-tailed deer and turkey hunters to access the 
refuge from 2 hours before legal sunrise until 2 hours after legal 
sunset.
    (iv) We allow youth and special big game hunts during New York 
State's established youth and special big game hunts each year.
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow access for fishing from designated 
areas of the refuge subject to the following condition: We prohibit the 
use of lead fishing tackle.
* * * * *

0
13. Amend Sec.  32.52 by revising and republishing paragraph (i) to 
read as follows:


Sec.  32.52  North Carolina.

* * * * *
    (i) Pocosin Lakes National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of duck, goose, swan, dove, woodcock, rail, 
and snipe on designated areas of the refuge subject to the following 
conditions:
    (i) We require all hunters and anglers to possess and carry a 
signed, self-service refuge hunting/fishing permit (signed brochure) 
while hunting and fishing on the refuge. We require all hunters age 16 
and older to purchase and carry a special refuge recreational activity 
permit (name/address/phone number).
    (ii) We allow hunters to enter and remain in hunting areas from 2 
hours before legal sunrise until 2 hours after legal sunset when we 
allow hunting in those areas.
    (iii) We allow the use of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) only on 
designated ATV roads (see Sec.  27.31 of this chapter) and only to 
transport hunters and their equipment to hunt and scout. We allow 
hunting from ATVs while on these designated ATV roads when they are 
stationary and the engine is turned off. We allow ATV use only on the 
ATV roads at the following times:
    (A) When we open the ATV road and surrounding area to hunting;
    (B) One week prior to the ATV road and surrounding area opening to 
hunting; and
    (C) On Sundays, when we open the ATV road and surrounding area for 
hunting the following Monday.
    (iv) We allow the use of only biodegradable-type flagging.
    (v) We allow the use of only portable blinds and temporary blinds 
constructed of natural materials. You must remove portable blinds at 
the end of each day (see Sec.  27.93 of this chapter).
    (vi) We allow the use of dogs to point and retrieve migratory game 
birds.
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of quail, squirrel, 
raccoon, opossum, rabbit, beaver, nutria, and fox on designated areas 
of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (i)(1)(i) through (iv) 
of this section apply.
    (ii) We only allow the taking of beaver and nutria with firearms 
and only during those times when the area is open to hunting of other 
game animals with firearms.
    (iii) We prohibit the hunting of raccoon and opossum during, 5 days 
before, and 5 days after the State bear seasons. Outside of these 
periods, we allow the hunting of raccoon and opossum at night but only 
while possessing a General Special Use Application and Permit (FWS Form 
3-1383-G).
    (iv) We prohibit the use of rifles, other than .22-caliber rimfire 
rifles, for hunting, and we prohibit the use of pistols for hunting.
    (v) We allow the use of dogs for pointing and retrieving upland 
game and for chasing rabbit (but not fox). We prohibit possession of 
buckshot or slugs while hunting with dogs.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of black bear, deer, turkey, 
and feral hog on designated areas of the refuge subject to the 
following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (i)(1)(i) through (iv) 
of this section apply.
    (ii) You may hunt turkey only if you carry a valid permit (General 
Activities Special Use Permit Application, FWS Form 3-1383-G). These 
permits are valid only for the dates and areas shown on the permit. You 
may possess only approved nontoxic shot (see Sec.  32.2(k)) while 
hunting turkeys west of Evans Road and on the Pungo Unit.
    (iii) We only allow the take of white-tailed deer with the use of 
archery equipment, black powder firearms, and shotguns as authorized by 
the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission.
    (iv) For the special opportunity black bear hunt:
    (A) We allow the use of centerfire rifle only;
    (B) Hunters must shoot from a raised position (portable stand) of 
15 feet or higher; and
    (C) Additional requirements may apply for hunters selected to 
participate in the special opportunity hunt.
    (v) We allow deer hunting on the Pungo Unit only through the end of 
October each season, except that we allow deer hunting with archery 
equipment on the Pungo Unit through the end of November.
    (vi) We allow hunters to take feral hog in any area that is open to 
hunting deer using only those weapons authorized for taking deer. On 
the Frying Pan tracts, we also allow hunters to take feral hog, using 
only those weapons authorized for taking deer, whenever we open those 
tracts to hunting any game species with firearms.
    (vii) We allow the use of only portable deer stands (tree climbers, 
ladders, tripods, etc.). We require that you

[[Page 41920]]

remove all stands, blinds, and other personal property at the end of 
each day (see Sec.  27.93 of this chapter).
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow fishing in Pungo Lake and New Lake only from March 1 
through October 31, except that we close Pungo Lake and the entire 
Pungo Unit to fishing during the limited big game hunts.
    (ii) We allow fishing only from \1/2\ hour before legal sunrise 
until \1/2\ hour after legal sunset.
* * * * *

0
14. Amend Sec.  32.59 by revising and republishing paragraph (d) to 
read as follows:


Sec.  32.59   South Carolina.

* * * * *
    (d) Pinckney Island National Wildlife Refuge (1)-(2) [Reserved]
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer on 
designated areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We require a refuge hunt permit (electronic form) for all 
hunters age 16 and older.
    (ii) Each hunter may place one stand on the refuge during the week 
preceding the hunt. You must remove your stand at the end of the hunt 
(see Sec.  27.93 of this chapter).
    (iii) We allow only shotguns (20 gauge or larger), muzzleloaders, 
and bows as governed by State regulations.
    (iv) We prohibit the use of buckshot.
    (v) We prohibit hunting closer than 100 yards (90 meters (m)) to 
U.S. Highway 278 or the check station area, or closer than 200 yards 
(180 m) to the residence area.
    (vi) Hunters may take five deer (no more than two antlered).
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow sport fishing on designated areas of 
the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow saltwater fishing year-round in the estuarine waters 
adjacent to the refuge.
    (ii) We prohibit freshwater fishing.
* * * * *

0
15. Amend Sec.  32.62 by:
0
a. Removing paragraph (a);
0
b. Redesignating paragraphs (b) through (h) as paragraphs (a) through 
(g), respectively;
0
c. Revising and republishing newly redesignated paragraph (e);
0
d. Adding new paragraph (h); and
0
e. Revising and republishing paragraph (i).
    The revisions and addition read as follows:


Sec.  32.62  Texas.

* * * * *
    (e) Buffalo Lake National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game bird 
hunting. We allow hunting of mourning dove, white-winged dove, and 
Eurasian collared-dove on designated areas of the refuge subject to the 
following conditions:
    (i) We require hunters to obtain a refuge permit (FWS Form 3-2439).
    (ii) All hunters must check in and out at refuge headquarters.
    (iii) Bag limits will be determined annually for each species but 
will never exceed the limits set by Texas Parks and Wildlife 
Department. Bag limits and other hunting information, such as number of 
hunt days and permits issued, will be posted prior to the hunt.
    (iv) We prohibit the use of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs).
    (v) 1 hour after legal sunset, hunters may only be present on the 
refuge in designated camping areas.
    (vi) We allow the use of dogs for retrieving game.
    (vii) Hunters must attend a briefing prior to all hunts.
    (viii) We prohibit falconry.
    (ix) All bird harvests must be checked at the designated check 
points.
    (x) Hunting hours will be from \1/2\ hour before legal sunrise 
until 12 p.m. (noon).
    (2) Upland game hunting. We allow hunting of ring-necked pheasant, 
northern bobwhite, and scaled quail on designated areas of the refuge 
subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (f)(1)(i) through (ix) 
of this section apply.
    (ii) Hunting hours will be from 9 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
    (iii) We allow only shotguns for pheasant and quail hunting.
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer, mule 
deer, and feral hog on designated areas of the refuge subject to the 
following conditions:
    (i) The conditions set forth at paragraph (f)(1)(i) through (vii) 
of this section apply.
    (ii) Hunters may enter the hunting area and begin hunting 1 hour 
before legal sunrise and must exit the hunting area by 1 hour after 
legal sunset.
    (iii) We prohibit the use of tree stands and any devices, such as 
nails, tacks, or scaffolding, used to climb trees. We also prohibit the 
use of elevated blinds, including tripod blinds.
    (iv) We prohibit the use of decoys.
    (v) We only allow archery equipment or centerfire rifles (.243/6mm 
or larger) as methods of take.
    (4) [Reserved]
* * * * *
    (h) Jocelyn Nungaray National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game 
bird hunting. We allow hunting of goose, duck, coot, white-winged dove, 
mourning dove, rock dove, Eurasian collared-dove, and rock pigeon on 
designated areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) You must carry a current signed refuge hunting permit (signed 
refuge hunt brochure) while waterfowl hunting on all refuge hunt units.
    (ii) Season dates for waterfowl will be concurrent with the State, 
except as specified in the refuge hunt brochure.
    (iii) Hunters age 17 and younger must be under the direct 
supervision of an adult age 18 or older.
    (iv) For waterfowl hunting, you may enter the refuge hunt units no 
earlier than 4 a.m. Hunting starts at the designated legal shooting 
time and ends at 12 p.m. (noon). You must leave refuge hunt units by 
12:30 p.m. For dove hunting, you may enter the refuge 1 hour before 
legal sunrise and must leave the refuge by \1/2\ hour after legal 
sunset. We close refuge hunt units on Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New 
Year's Day.
    (v) For waterfowl hunting, we allow hunting in portions of the East 
Unit on Saturdays, Sundays, and Tuesdays during the regular waterfowl 
seasons.
    (vi) Hunters must check in and out through the check station (FWS 
Form 3-2405) when accessing the East Unit by vehicle.
    (vii) We require hunters to remain in an assigned area for that 
day's hunt.
    (viii) We allow hunters to access designated areas of the East Unit 
by boat from Jackson Ditch, East Bay Bayou, or Onion Bayou.
    (ix) We allow hunting on the East Unit as governed by the State 
light goose conservation order. Hunt areas are by permit on a first-
come, first-served basis the morning of the hunt. We allow a maximum of 
six persons per field. Individuals in each group must set up and stay 
in their permitted area and stay within 50 feet (15 meters (m)) of each 
other unless retrieving goose.
    (x) Hunters must set up within 50 yards (45 m) of the post marker 
and must stay within 50 feet (15 m) of each other unless retrieving 
waterfowl. We allow a minimum of two, and a maximum of six, persons per 
permit.
    (xi) We allow hunting in portions of the Middleton Tract daily 
during the September teal season and on Saturdays, Sundays, and 
Wednesdays of the regular waterfowl season.
    (xii) We restrict motorized boats in inland waters of the Middleton 
Tract to motors of 25 horsepower or less or

[[Page 41921]]

electric trolling motors during hunting season.
    (xiii) You may access hunt areas by foot, nonmotorized watercraft, 
outboard motorboat, or airboat. Airboats may not exceed 10 horsepower 
with direct drive with a propeller length of 48 inches (120 
centimeters) or less.
    (xiv) On inland waters of refuge hunt areas open to motorized 
boats, we restrict the operation of motorized boats to lakes, ponds, 
ditches, and other waterways when hunting. We prohibit the operation of 
motorized boats on or through emergent wetland vegetation.
    (xv) On inland waters of the refuge hunt areas open to motorized 
boats, we restrict the use of boats powered by air-cooled or radiator-
cooled engines to those powered by a single engine of 25 horsepower or 
less and utilizing a propeller 9 inches (22.5 centimeters) in diameter 
or less during the hunting season.
    (xvi) We allow portable blinds or temporary natural vegetation 
blinds. You must remove all blinds, decoys, boats, spent shells, marsh 
chairs, and other equipment from the refuge at the end of each day's 
hunt (see Sec. Sec.  27.93 and 27.94 of this chapter).
    (xvii) We require a minimum distance between hunt parties of 200 
yards (180 m).
    (xviii) We allow the use of dogs when hunting.
    (2)-(3) [Reserved]
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow fishing and crabbing on designated 
areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow fishing and crabbing only with pole and line, rod and 
reel, or handheld line. We prohibit the use any method not expressly 
allowed, including trotlines, setlines, jug lines, limb lines, bows and 
arrows, gigs, spears, or crab traps.
    (ii) We allow cast netting for bait for personal use along 
waterways in areas open to the public and along public roads.
    (iii) The conditions set forth at paragraphs (a)(1)(xiii) and (xv) 
of this section apply.
    (iv) We prohibit mooring to water control structures.
    (i) Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge--(1) Migratory game 
bird hunting. The refuge is closed to migratory bird hunting, including 
shoreline hunting, but retrieval of birds downed by hunters hunting on 
nearby navigable waters under State regulations is authorized subject 
to the following conditions:
    (i) Hunters may not discharge firearms while retrieving waterfowl 
on the refuge.
    (ii) Access for waterfowl retrieval will be allowed only during 
State specified hunting seasons. We only allow hunters to enter the 
Laguna Atascosa Unit by boat, and hunters may only enter subunits 3, 4, 
5, 7, and 10, for retrieval of downed waterfowl.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (3) Big game hunting. We allow hunting of white-tailed deer, feral 
hog, nilgai antelope, other exotic ungulates, and American alligator on 
designated areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow the incidental take of nilgai antelope, feral hog, and 
other rarely observed exotic ungulates (such as fallow deer, axis deer, 
sika deer, Barbary sheep, and black buck) during all refuge hunts, with 
the exception of American alligator hunts.
    (ii) We require hunters to review the refuge hunter orientation 
email prior to any refuge hunt activity.
    (iii) Bag limits for species hunted on the refuge are provided in 
the refuge hunt brochure annually.
    (iv) We allow a scouting period prior to the commencement of each 
refuge hunt period. A permitted hunter and a limit of two non-permitted 
individuals may enter the hunt units during the scouting period, which 
begins after hunter orientation and ends at legal sunset. Each hunter 
must clearly display a Vehicle Validation Tag (FWS Form 3-2405) face up 
on the vehicle dashboard when scouting and hunting.
    (v) We allow hunters to enter the refuge 1\1/2\ hours before legal 
sunrise during their permitted hunt periods. Hunters must leave the 
hunt units no later than 1 hour after State legal shooting hours.
    (vi) Hunters may access hunt units only by foot or bicycle, 
including electric bicycles. You may only use a bicycle on designated 
routes; we prohibit off-road use of a bicycle.
    (vii) We allow hunting from portable stands or by stalking and 
still hunting. There is a limit of one blind or stand per permitted 
hunter. Hunters must attach hunter identification (permit number or 
State license number) to the blind or stand. Hunters must remove all 
blinds and stands at the end of the permitted hunt period (see Sec.  
27.93 of this chapter).
    (viii) During American alligator hunts, we allow hunters to leave 
hooks set over only one night period at a time; set lines must be 
checked daily.
    (ix) Hunters must field dress all harvested big game in the field 
and check the game at the hunt check station before removal from the 
refuge. Hunters may use a nonmotorized cart to assist with the 
transportation of harvested game animals.
    (x) We prohibit the killing or wounding of a game animal and then 
intentionally or knowingly failing to make a reasonable effort to 
retrieve and include it in the hunter's bag limit.
    (4) Sport fishing. We allow fishing and crabbing on designated 
areas of the refuge subject to the following conditions:
    (i) We allow only pole and line, rod and reel, hand line, dip net, 
and cast net for fishing. We prohibit the use of crab traps or pots for 
crabbing.
    (ii) Anglers must attend all fishing lines, crabbing equipment, and 
other fishing devices at all times.
    (iii) Inside the refuge boundary on San Martin Lake, we allow bank 
and wade fishing within a designated area, which may be accessed only 
on foot.
* * * * *

PART 71--HUNTING AND SPORT FISHING ON NATIONAL FISH HATCHERIES

0
16. The authority citation for part 71 continues to read as follows:

    Authority: Sec. 4, Pub. L. 73-121, 48 Stat. 402, as amended; 
sec. 4, Pub. L. 87-714, 76 Stat. 654; 5 U.S.C. 301; 16 U.S.C. 460k, 
664, 668dd, 1534.


0
17. Amend Sec.  71.12 by:
0
a. Redesignating paragraphs (o) through (s) as paragraphs (p) through 
(t), respectively; and
0
b. Adding new paragraph (o).
    The addition reads as follows:


Sec.  71.12  National fish hatcheries open for sport fishing.

* * * * *
    (o) North Attleboro National Fish Hatchery. We allow sport fishing 
on designated areas of the hatchery.
* * * * *

Kevin Lilly,
Acting Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks.
[FR Doc. 2025-16440 Filed 8-27-25; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4333-15-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>