<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 85 Issue 190 (Wednesday, September 30, 2020)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 85, Number 190 (Wednesday, September 30, 2020)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 61619-61638]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2020-19115]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Fish and Wildlife Service

50 CFR Part 17

[Docket No. FWS-R4-ES-2018-0073; FF09E21000 FXES11110900000 201]
RIN 1018-BD40


Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Designation of 
Critical Habitat for the Trispot Darter

AGENCY: Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: We, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service), designate 
critical habitat for the trispot darter (Etheostoma trisella) under the 
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (Act), as amended. We are designating as 
critical habitat for this species six units, totaling approximately 
175.4 miles (282.3 kilometers) of streams and rivers and 9,929 acres 
(4,018 hectares), in Calhoun, Cherokee, Etowah, and St. Clair Counties 
in Alabama; Gordon, Murray, and Whitfield Counties in Georgia; and 
Bradley and Polk Counties in Tennessee. This rule extends the Act's 
protections to the trispot darter's designated critical habitat.

DATES: This rule is effective October 30, 2020.

ADDRESSES: This final rule is available on the internet at <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a> and <a href="http://www.fws.gov/daphne">http://www.fws.gov/daphne</a>. Comments and 
materials we received, as well as some supporting documentation we used 
in preparing this rule, are available for public inspection at <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a>.
    The coordinates or plot points or both from which the maps are 
generated are included in the administrative record for this critical 
habitat designation and are available at <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a> at 
Docket No. FWS-R4-ES-2018-0073 and at the Alabama Ecological Services 
Field Office's website (<a href="https://www.fws.gov/daphne">https://www.fws.gov/daphne</a>). Any additional 
tools or supporting information that we developed for this critical 
habitat designation will also be available at the Fish and Wildlife 
Service website and may also be included in the preamble and at <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a>.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: William Pearson, Field Supervisor, 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, telephone 251-441-5184. If you use a 
telecommunications device for the deaf (TDD), call the Federal Relay 
Service at 800-877-8339.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Executive Summary

    Why we need to publish a rule. Under the Endangered Species Act of 
1973 (Act), as amended, if we determine that a species is an endangered 
or threatened species, we must designate critical habitat to the 
maximum extent prudent and determinable. We published a final rule to 
list the trispot darter as a threatened species on December 28, 2018 
(83 FR 67131). Designations of critical habitat can be completed only 
by issuing a rule.
    What this document does. This rule finalizes a designation of 
critical habitat for the trispot darter of approximately 175.4 miles 
(282.3 kilometers) of streams and rivers and 9,929 acres (4,018 
hectares), in Calhoun, Cherokee, Etowah, and St. Clair Counties in 
Alabama; Gordon, Murray, and Whitfield Counties in Georgia; and Bradley 
and Polk Counties in Tennessee.
    The basis for our action. Under section 4(a)(3) of the Act, if we 
determine that any species is an endangered or threatened species we 
must, to the maximum extent prudent and determinable, designate 
critical habitat. Section 4(b)(2) of the Act states that the Secretary 
shall designate critical habitat on the basis of the best available 
scientific data after taking into consideration the economic impact, 
national security impact, and any other relevant impact of specifying 
any particular area as critical habitat. Section 3(5)(A) of the Act 
defines critical habitat as (i) the specific areas within the 
geographical area occupied by the species, at the time it is listed, on 
which are found those physical or biological features (I) essential to 
the conservation of the species and (II) which may require special 
management considerations or protections; and (ii) specific areas 
outside the geographical area occupied by the species at the time it is 
listed, upon a determination by the Secretary that such areas are 
essential for the conservation of the species. The Secretary may 
exclude an area from critical habitat if he determines that the 
benefits of such exclusion outweigh the benefits of specifying such 
area as part

[[Page 61620]]

of the critical habitat, unless he determines, based on the best 
scientific data available, that the failure to designate such area as 
critical habitat will result in the extinction of the species.
    The critical habitat we are designating in this rule, consisting of 
six units comprising approximately 175.4 miles (282.3 kilometers) of 
streams and rivers, in an area of 9,929 acres (4,018 hectares), 
constitutes our current best assessment of the areas that meet the 
definition of critical habitat for the trispot darter.
    Economic analysis. In accordance with section 4(b)(2) of the Act, 
we prepared an economic analysis of the impacts of designating critical 
habitat for the trispot darter. We published the announcement of, and 
solicited public comments on, the draft economic analysis (DEA; 83 FR 
67190, December 28, 2018). Because we received no comments on the DEA, 
we adopted the DEA as a final version.
    Peer review and public comments. We considered all comments and 
information we received from the public and peer reviewers during the 
comment period on the proposed designation of critical habitat for the 
trispot darter and the associated DEA (83 FR 67190; December 28, 2018).

Previous Federal Actions

    On October 4, 2017, we published a proposed rule in the Federal 
Register (82 FR 46183) to list the trispot darter as a threatened 
species under the Act (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.). On December 28, 2018, 
we published a final rule (83 FR 67131) to list the species as a 
threatened species. On the same date, we published a proposed section 
4(d) rule for the trispot darter (83 FR 67185) and a proposed critical 
habitat rule for the species (83 FR 67190). Please refer to these rules 
for a detailed description of previous Federal actions concerning this 
species. Elsewhere in today's Federal Register, we issue a final rule 
under section 4(d) of the Act that provides measures necessary and 
advisable for the conservation of the threatened trispot darter.

Summary of Changes From the Proposed Rule

    This final rule incorporates changes to our proposed rule (83 FR 
67190; December 28, 2018) based on the comments we received, as 
discussed above under Summary of Comments and Recommendations. We made 
changes to the unit sizes in the proposed critical habitat rule as a 
result of a public comment we received. Based on our mapping analysis 
of elevations where spawning has occurred, we omitted areas from Unit 1 
in this critical habitat designation that are likely to be perennially 
dry, and we added language to the rule to clarify that perennially dry 
areas that are located within the critical habitat boundaries are not 
being designated as critical habitat. Our analysis also revealed other 
areas that we removed from critical habitat in Unit 4 (Mill Creek). 
These areas in Unit 4 are not suitable for seasonal spawning, because a 
large portion (86 percent) is occupied by large commercial structures 
and the remaining portion contains straightened channels with 
intervening segments enclosed in culverts. In addition to the altered 
spawning areas, tributaries to Mill Creek are not included in this 
final critical habitat designation because they also have been heavily 
altered. The mapping analysis to more precisely identify spawning areas 
and removal of developed areas in the Mill Creek unit reduced the total 
amount of critical habitat we are designating, from 16,735 acres (ac) 
(6,772 hectares (ha)) in the proposed rule, to 9,929 ac (4,018 ha) in 
this final rule.

Supporting Documents

    We prepared a species status assessment (SSA) report for the 
trispot darter. Written in consultation with species experts, the SSA 
report represents the best scientific and commercial data available 
concerning the status of the trispot darter, including its habitat 
needs, and impacts of past, present, and future factors (both negative 
and beneficial) affecting the species and its habitat (Service 2018, 
entire). In accordance with our joint policy on peer review published 
in the Federal Register on July 1, 1994 (59 FR 34270), and our August 
22, 2016, memorandum updating and clarifying the role of peer review of 
listing actions under the Act, the SSA report underwent independent 
peer review by scientists with expertise in fish biology, habitat 
management, and stressors (factors negatively affecting the species) to 
the trispot darter. The purpose of peer review is to ensure that our 
listing determinations and critical habitat designations are based on 
scientifically sound data, assumptions, and analyses. The SSA report 
(Service 2018, entire), the proposed and final listing rules (82 FR 
46183, October 4, 2017; 83 FR 67131, December 28, 2018, respectively), 
the proposed critical habitat rule (83 FR 67190; December 28, 2018), 
this final rule, and other materials relating to this rulemaking can be 
found on the Service's Southeast Region website at <a href="https://www.fws.gov/southeast/">https://www.fws.gov/southeast/</a> and at <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a> under Docket No. FWS-R4-
ES-2018-0073.

Summary of Comments and Recommendations

    In the proposed rule published on December 28, 2018 (83 FR 67190), 
we requested that all interested parties submit written comments on the 
proposal by February 26, 2019. We also contacted appropriate Federal 
and State agencies, scientific experts and organizations, and other 
interested parties and invited them to comment on the proposal. 
Newspaper notices inviting general public comment were published in the 
Chattanooga Times Free Press (2/8/19), The Daily Citizen (2/08/19), 
Daily Home (2/13/19), and St. Clair Times (2/14/19). We did not receive 
any requests for a public hearing. During the open comment period, we 
received 27 public comments on the proposed rule to designate critical 
habitat for the trispot darter; a majority of comments supported the 
designation of critical habitat, and none opposed the designation. 
However, some commenters provided suggestions on how we could refine or 
improve the designation, and all substantive information provided to us 
during the comment period has been incorporated directly into this 
final rule or is addressed below.
    (1) Comment: Two commenters sought clarification on how designated 
critical habitat will affect agriculture and development activities.
    Our Response: Private agricultural and development activities on 
private lands will not be affected by designated critical habitat, 
because the Act does not authorize the Service to regulate private 
actions on private lands or confiscate private property as a result of 
critical habitat designation. An action with a Federal nexus, meaning 
one that is authorized, funded, or carried out by a Federal agency, 
would, on private lands, be subject to consultation under section 7 of 
the Act. However, routine agricultural and forestry activities on 
private lands are not likely to have a Federal nexus and require 
consultation. Designation of critical habitat does not affect land 
ownership, or establish any closures or restrictions on use of, or 
access to, the designated areas whether private, tribal, State, or 
Federal. Critical habitat designation also does not establish a refuge, 
wilderness, reserve, preserve, or other conservation area, and does not 
require implementation of restoration, recovery, or enhancement 
measures by non-Federal landowners. In addition, critical habitat 
designation does not establish specific land management standards or 
prescriptions

[[Page 61621]]

for private parties, although Federal agencies are prohibited from 
carrying out, funding, or authorizing actions that would destroy or 
adversely modify critical habitat.
    (2) Comment: One commenter recommended that we reevaluate Unit 1 of 
proposed critical habitat because, as proposed, it included upland 
areas that do not provide the physical and biological features that 
support the trispot darter. The commenter suggested that we use finer 
resolution data to undertake an analysis that more precisely delineates 
critical habitat for the species. The same commenter requested that we 
provide additional language explaining that perennially dry lands 
inadvertently left inside critical habitat boundaries due to mapping 
resolution constraints are not being designated as critical habitat.
    Our Response: Finer resolution data are not consistently available 
throughout the range of the trispot darter and could not be used to 
more precisely delineate the habitat containing the physical and 
biological features necessary for the species to spawn. In the absence 
of finer resolution data, to refine our critical habitat maps and 
exclude upland areas that are not suitable habitat because they are dry 
perennially, we used mean elevation data; specifically, we analyzed the 
mean elevation where there are records for spawning trispot darters 
and, from our analysis, we include in the designated critical habitat 
all areas of the proposed critical habitat that are up to one standard 
deviation greater than the calculated mean elevation for trispot darter 
spawning occurrences. This approach removed much of the upland areas 
originally proposed as critical habitat in Unit 1 that are likely 
perennially dry and lacking any of the physical and biological features 
necessary for the species. The analysis also resulted in revisions to 
proposed Unit 4, as discussed above in Summary of Changes from the 
Proposed Rule. In this final rule, we include language in the 
description of the critical habitat units to specify that perennially 
dry areas not identified as such by the mapping analysis are not being 
designated as critical habitat (see Final Critical Habitat Designation, 
below).

Critical Habitat

Background

    Critical habitat is defined in section 3 of the Act as:
    (1) The specific areas within the geographical area occupied by the 
species, at the time it is listed in accordance with the Act, on which 
are found those physical or biological features
    (a) Essential to the conservation of the species, and
    (b) Which may require special management considerations or 
protection; and
    (2) Specific areas outside the geographical area occupied by the 
species at the time it is listed, upon a determination that such areas 
are essential for the conservation of the species.
    Our regulations at 50 CFR 424.02 define the geographical area 
occupied by the species as an area that may generally be delineated 
around species' occurrences, as determined by the Secretary (i.e., 
range). Such areas may include those areas used throughout all or part 
of the species' life cycle, even if not used on a regular basis (e.g., 
migratory corridors, seasonal habitats, and habitats used periodically, 
but not solely by vagrant individuals).
    Conservation, as defined under section 3 of the Act, means to use 
and the use of all methods and procedures that are necessary to bring 
an endangered or threatened species to the point at which the measures 
provided pursuant to the Act are no longer necessary. Such methods and 
procedures include, but are not limited to, all activities associated 
with scientific resources management such as research, census, law 
enforcement, habitat acquisition and maintenance, propagation, live 
trapping, and transplantation, and, in the extraordinary case where 
population pressures within a given ecosystem cannot be otherwise 
relieved, may include regulated taking.
    Critical habitat receives protection under section 7 of the Act 
through the requirement that Federal agencies ensure, in consultation 
with the Service, that any action they authorize, fund, or carry out is 
not likely to result in the destruction or adverse modification of 
critical habitat. The designation of critical habitat does not affect 
land ownership or establish a refuge, wilderness, reserve, preserve, or 
other conservation area. Such designation does not allow the government 
or public to access private lands. Such designation does not require 
implementation of restoration, recovery, or enhancement measures by 
non-Federal landowners. Where a landowner requests Federal agency 
funding or authorization for an action that may affect a listed species 
or critical habitat, the Federal agency would be required to consult 
with the Service under section 7(a)(2) of the Act. However, even if the 
Service were to conclude that the proposed activity would result in 
destruction or adverse modification of the critical habitat, the 
Federal action agency and the landowner are not required to abandon the 
proposed activity, or to restore or recover the species; instead, they 
must implement ``reasonable and prudent alternatives'' to avoid 
destruction or adverse modification of critical habitat.
    Under the first prong of the Act's definition of critical habitat, 
areas within the geographical area occupied by the species at the time 
it was listed are included in a critical habitat designation if they 
contain physical or biological features (1) which are essential to the 
conservation of the species and (2) which may require special 
management considerations or protection. For these areas, critical 
habitat designations identify, to the extent known using the best 
scientific and commercial data available, those physical or biological 
features that are essential to the conservation of the species (such as 
space, food, cover, and protected habitat). In identifying those 
physical or biological features within an area, we focus on the 
specific features that support the life-history needs of the species, 
including, but not limited to, water characteristics, soil type, 
geological features, prey, vegetation, symbiotic species, or other 
features. A feature may be a single habitat characteristic, or a more 
complex combination of habitat characteristics. Features may include 
habitat characteristics that support ephemeral or dynamic habitat 
conditions. Features may also be expressed in terms relating to 
principles of conservation biology, such as patch size, distribution 
distances, and connectivity.
    Under the second prong of the Act's definition of critical habitat, 
we may designate critical habitat in areas outside the geographical 
area occupied by the species at the time it is listed, upon a 
determination that such areas are essential for the conservation of the 
species. We will determine whether unoccupied areas are essential for 
the conservation of the species by considering the life-history, 
status, and conservation needs of the species. This will be further 
informed by any generalized conservation strategy, criteria, or outline 
that may have been developed for the species to provide a substantive 
foundation for identifying which features and specific areas are 
essential to the conservation of the species and, as a result, the 
development of the critical habitat designation. For example, an area 
currently occupied by the species but that was not occupied at the time 
of

[[Page 61622]]

listing may be essential to the conservation of the species and may be 
included in the critical habitat designation.
    Section 4 of the Act requires that we designate critical habitat on 
the basis of the best scientific data available. Our Policy on 
Information Standards under the Endangered Species Act (published in 
the Federal Register on July 1, 1994 (59 FR 34271)), the Information 
Quality Act (section 515 of the Treasury and General Government 
Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 2001 (Pub. L. 106-554; H.R. 5658)), 
and our associated Information Quality Guidelines, provide criteria, 
establish procedures, and provide guidance to ensure that our decisions 
are based on the best scientific data available. They require our 
biologists, to the extent consistent with the Act and with the use of 
the best scientific data available, to use primary and original sources 
of information as the basis for recommendations to designate critical 
habitat.
    When we are determining which areas should be designated as 
critical habitat, our primary source of information is generally the 
information from the SSA report and other information developed during 
the listing process for the species. Additional information sources may 
include any generalized conservation strategy, criteria, or outline 
that may have been developed for the species; the recovery plan for the 
species; articles in peer-reviewed journals; conservation plans 
developed by States and counties; scientific status surveys and 
studies; biological assessments; other unpublished materials; or 
experts' opinions or personal knowledge.
    Habitat is dynamic, and species may move from one area to another 
over time. We recognize that critical habitat designated at a 
particular point in time may not include all of the habitat areas that 
we may later determine are necessary for the recovery of the species. 
For these reasons, a critical habitat designation does not signal that 
habitat outside the designated area is unimportant or may not be needed 
for recovery of the species. Areas that are important to the 
conservation of the species, both inside and outside the critical 
habitat designation, will continue to be subject to: (1) Conservation 
actions implemented under section 7(a)(1) of the Act; (2) regulatory 
protections afforded by the requirement in section 7(a)(2) of the Act 
for Federal agencies to ensure their actions are not likely to 
jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered or threatened 
species; and (3) section 9 of the Act's prohibitions on taking any 
individual of the species, including taking caused by actions that 
affect habitat. Federally funded or permitted projects affecting listed 
species outside their designated critical habitat areas may still 
result in jeopardy findings in some cases. These protections and 
conservation tools will continue to contribute to recovery of this 
species. Similarly, critical habitat designations made on the basis of 
the best available information at the time of designation will not 
control the direction and substance of future recovery plans, habitat 
conservation plans, or other species conservation planning efforts if 
new information available at the time of these planning efforts calls 
for a different outcome.
    On August 27, 2019, we published a final rule in the Federal 
Register (84 FR 45020) to amend our regulations concerning the 
procedures and criteria we use to designate and revise critical 
habitat. That rule became effective on September 26, 2019, but, as 
stated under DATES in that rule, the amendments it sets forth apply to 
rules for which a proposed rule was published after September 26, 2019. 
We published our proposed critical habitat designation for the trispot 
darter on December 28, 2018 (83 FR 67190); therefore, the amendments 
set forth in the August 27, 2019, final rule at 84 FR 45020 do not 
apply to this final designation of critical habitat for the trispot 
darter.

Prudency and Determinability

    Section 4(a)(3) of the Act, as amended, and implementing 
regulations (50 CFR 424.12) require that, to the maximum extent prudent 
and determinable, the Secretary shall designate critical habitat at the 
time the species is determined to be an endangered or threatened 
species. In our proposed critical habitat rule (83 FR 67190; December 
28, 2018), we found that designating critical habitat is both prudent 
and determinable. In this final rule, we reaffirm those determinations.

Physical or Biological Features Essential to the Conservation of the 
Species

    In accordance with section 3(5)(A)(i) of the Act and regulations at 
50 CFR 424.12(b), in determining which areas within the geographical 
area occupied by the species at the time of listing to designate as 
critical habitat, we consider the physical or biological features that 
are essential to the conservation of the species and which may require 
special management considerations or protection. The regulations at 50 
CFR 424.02 define ``physical or biological features essential to the 
conservation of the species'' as the features that occur in specific 
areas and that are essential to support the life-history needs of the 
species, including, but not limited to, water characteristics, soil 
type, geological features, sites, prey, vegetation, symbiotic species, 
or other features. A feature may be a single habitat characteristic or 
a more complex combination of habitat characteristics. Features may 
include habitat characteristics that support ephemeral or dynamic 
habitat conditions. Features may also be expressed in terms relating to 
principles of conservation biology, such as patch size, distribution 
distances, and connectivity. For example, physical features essential 
to the conservation of the species might include gravel of a particular 
size required for spawning, alkali soil for seed germination, 
protective cover for migration, or susceptibility to flooding or fire 
that maintains necessary early-successional habitat characteristics. 
Biological features might include prey species, forage grasses, 
specific kinds or ages of trees for roosting or nesting, symbiotic 
fungi, or a particular level of nonnative species consistent with 
conservation needs of the listed species. The features may also be 
combinations of habitat characteristics and may encompass the 
relationship between characteristics or the necessary amount of a 
characteristic essential to support the life history of the species.
    In considering whether features are essential to the conservation 
of the species, the Service may consider an appropriate quality, 
quantity, and spatial and temporal arrangement of habitat 
characteristics in the context of the life-history needs, condition, 
and status of the species. These include, but are not limited to, space 
for individual and population growth and for normal behavior; food, 
water, air, light, minerals, or other nutritional or physiological 
requirements; cover or shelter; sites for breeding, reproduction, or 
rearing (or development) of offspring; and habitats that are protected 
from disturbance.
    The trispot darter is a freshwater fish that occurs in the Coosa 
River system in the Ridge and Valley ecoregion of Alabama, Georgia, and 
Tennessee. It is a migratory species that uses distinct breeding and 
nonbreeding habitats. From approximately April to October, the species 
occupies its nonbreeding habitat, which consists of small to medium 
margins of rivers and lower reaches of tributaries with slower 
velocities. It is associated with detritus, logs, and stands of water 
willow, and with a substrate that consists of small cobbles, pebbles, 
gravel, and often a fine

[[Page 61623]]

layer of silt. During low flow periods, the darters move away from the 
peripheral zones and toward the main channel; edges of water willow 
beds, riffles, and pools; and mouths of tributaries.
    Migration into spawning areas begins in approximately late November 
or early December, with fish moving from the main channels into 
tributaries and eventually reaching adjacent seepage areas where they 
will congregate and remain for the duration of spawning, until 
approximately late April. Breeding sites are intermittent seepage areas 
and ditches with little to no flow; shallow depths (12 inches (30 
centimeters) or less); moderate leaf litter covering mixed cobble, 
gravel, sand, and clay; a deep layer of soft silt over clay; and 
emergent vegetation. Additionally, breeding sites possess channels that 
maintain base flow throughout the winter and early spring.
    Trispot darters predominantly feed on mayfly nymphs and midge 
larvae and pupae. A thorough review of the life history and ecology of 
the trispot darter is presented in the SSA report (Service 2018, 
entire). A summary of the resource needs of the trispot darter is 
provided below in Table 1.

  Table 1--Resource Needs for the Trispot Darter To Complete Each Life
                                  Stage
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Life stage                        Resources needed
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fertilized eggs...................  Ephemeral streams/ditches connected
                                     to nonbreeding habitat with
                                     adequate water quality; vegetation,
                                     rocks for adhesive eggs; eggs
                                     submerged on vegetation and/or
                                     rocks for approximately 30 days at
                                     53 degrees Fahrenheit ([deg]F) (12
                                     degrees Celsius ([deg]C)).
Larvae............................  Ephemeral streams/ditches connected
                                     to nonbreeding habitat with
                                     adequate water quality; low
                                     predation, disease, and
                                     environmental stress; flushing rain
                                     events to reach lower stream
                                     reaches; 41 days to reach juvenile
                                     stage.
Juveniles.........................  Flowing water with good water
                                     quality; low predation, disease,
                                     and environmental stress; adequate
                                     food availability.
Nonbreeding adults (mid-April to    Clear, flowing water in shallow
 mid-October).                       pools and backwaters in main
                                     channel with good water quality,
                                     with a fine layer of silt and/or
                                     debris, leaf litter; adequate food
                                     availability.
Breeding adults (late November to   Flowing water with adequate water
 late April).                        quality, adequate flow to connect
                                     to breeding areas; clean structure
                                     (vegetation, rock, substrate);
                                     appropriate male to female
                                     demographics; appropriate spawning
                                     temperatures.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Summary of Essential Physical or Biological Features

    We derive the specific physical or biological features essential to 
the conservation of trispot darter from studies of this species' 
habitat, ecology, and life history. Additional information can be found 
in the October 4, 2017, proposed listing rule (82 FR 46183); the 
December 28, 2018, final listing rule (83 FR 67131); the December 28, 
2018, proposed critical habitat rule (83 FR 67190); and the SSA report 
(Service 2018, entire). We have determined that the following physical 
or biological features are essential to the conservation of trispot 
darter:
    (1) Geomorphically stable, small to medium streams with detritus, 
woody debris, and stands of water willow (Justicia americana) over 
stream substrate that consists of small cobble, pebbles, gravel, and 
fine layers of silt; and intact riparian cover to maintain stream 
morphology and reduce erosion and sediment inputs.
    (2) Adequate seasonal water flows, or a hydrologic flow regime 
(which includes the severity, frequency, duration, and seasonality of 
discharge over time) necessary to maintain appropriate benthic habitats 
and to maintain and create connectivity between permanently flowing 
streams with associated streams that hold water from November through 
April, providing connectivity between the darter's spawning and summer 
areas.
    (3) Water and sediment quality (including, but not limited to, 
conductivity; hardness; turbidity; temperature; pH; ammonia; heavy 
metals; pesticides; animal waste products; and nitrogen, phosphorus, 
and potassium fertilizers) necessary to sustain natural physiological 
processes for normal behavior, growth, and viability of all life 
stages.
    (4) Prey base of aquatic macroinvertebrates.

Special Management Considerations or Protection

    When designating critical habitat, we assess whether the specific 
areas within the geographical area occupied by the species at the time 
of listing contain features that are essential to the conservation of 
the species and which may require special management considerations or 
protection. The features essential to the conservation of the trispot 
darter may require special management considerations or protections to 
reduce the following threats: (1) Urbanization of the landscape, 
including (but not limited to) land conversion for urban and commercial 
use, infrastructure (roads, bridges, utilities), and urban water uses 
(water supply reservoirs, wastewater treatment); (2) nutrient pollution 
from agricultural activities that impact water quantity and quality; 
(3) significant alteration of water quality; (4) improper forest 
management or silviculture activities that remove large areas of 
forested wetlands and riparian systems; (5) culvert and pipe 
installation that creates barriers to movement; (6) changes and shifts 
in seasonal precipitation patterns as a result of climate change; (7) 
other watershed and floodplain disturbances that release sediments or 
nutrients into the water or fill suitable spawning habitat; and (8) 
creation of reservoirs that convert permanently flowing streams and/or 
streams that hold water from November through April into lake or pond-
like (lentic) environments.
    Management activities that could ameliorate these threats include, 
but are not limited to, use of best management practices (BMPs) 
designed to reduce sedimentation, erosion, and bank-side destruction; 
protection of riparian corridors and suitable spawning habitat; 
retention of sufficient canopy cover along banks; moderation of surface 
and ground water withdrawals to maintain natural flow regimes; 
increased use of stormwater management and reduction of stormwater 
flows into the stream systems; placement of culverts or bridges that 
accommodate fish passage; and reduction of other watershed and 
floodplain disturbances that release sediments, pollutants, or 
nutrients into the water.

Criteria Used To Identify Critical Habitat

    As required by section 4(b)(2) of the Act, we use the best 
scientific data available to designate critical habitat. In

[[Page 61624]]

accordance with the Act and our implementing regulations at 50 CFR 
424.12(b), we review available information pertaining to the habitat 
requirements of the species and identify specific areas within the 
geographical area occupied by the species at the time of listing and 
any specific areas outside the geographical area occupied by the 
species to be considered for designation as critical habitat.
    The current distribution of the trispot darter is reduced from its 
historical distribution. We anticipate that recovery will require 
continued protection of existing populations and habitat, as well as 
ensuring there are adequate numbers of fish in stable populations and 
that these populations occur over a wide geographic area. This will 
help to ensure that catastrophic events, such as floods, cannot 
simultaneously affect all known populations. Rangewide recovery 
considerations, such as maintaining existing genetic diversity and 
striving for representation of all major portions of the species' 
current range, were considered in formulating this critical habitat 
designation.
    Sources of data for this critical habitat include multiple 
databases maintained by universities and State agencies in Tennessee, 
Alabama, and Georgia, as well as numerous survey reports on streams 
throughout the species' range. Other sources of available information 
on habitat requirements for this species include studies conducted at 
occupied sites and published in peer-reviewed articles, agency reports, 
and data collected during monitoring efforts (Service 2018, entire).

Areas Occupied at the Time of Listing

    This critical habitat designation does not include all streams 
known to have been occupied by the species historically; instead, it 
focuses on currently occupied streams and rivers within the historical 
range that have retained the necessary physical or biological features 
that will allow for the maintenance and expansion of existing 
populations. For the purposes of critical habitat designation, we 
determined a unit to be occupied if it contains recent (i.e., observed 
in the past 10 years (since 2007), based on the data available for the 
SSA analysis) observations of trispot darter. Collection records were 
compiled and provided to us by State partners funded under a concurrent 
section 6 status assessment for the trispot darter. Collection records 
were obtained through the website FISHNET2 (an online repository of 
ichthyological museum data) or directly from institutions. To delineate 
spawning areas for trispot darter, we identified waterways where the 
trispot darter was observed from November to April between the years 
2007 and 2017. We assume these observations represented fish in or near 
spawning habitat within the timeframe. We based this assumption on the 
knowledge that this short-lived migratory species will stage near 
spawning areas in pre-spawning congregations and that both spawning and 
non-spawning individuals will make a migration.
    We considered areas of low topographic variation at lower 
elevations as exhibiting topographic characteristics that support 
recharge of a shallow soil water table, slow release of water into 
breeding channels, and connectivity between ephemeral breeding channels 
and permanent trispot darter summer habitat. These areas support the 
essential physical and biological features that allow for adequate 
seasonal water flows, the hydrologic flow regime that maintains 
appropriate trispot habitat, and connectivity between streams in the 
winter. Areas of low topographic variation generally have slower stream 
velocities and retain water for longer duration (i.e., have a less 
``flashy'' hydrograph), in order to maintain necessary benthic habitat 
and stream substrate. Areas at lower elevation interact with permanent 
streams and rivers, and will be accessible to trispot darters 
attempting to migrate into adjacent ephemeral spawning streams.
    To identify areas with both low elevation and low topographic 
variation, we conducted a geographic information system (GIS) analysis 
using a 30-meter digital elevation model (DEM). We analyzed the areas 
in Alabama separately from areas in the upper Coosa River basin in 
Tennessee and Georgia owing to natural topographic differences between 
the two regions, with the upper Coosa River basin having greater 
topographic relief and higher elevations than areas where the species 
occurs in Alabama. Low elevation for this analysis was defined as one 
standard deviation above the mean elevation at which spawning trispot 
darters were observed. Therefore, elevation ranged from 558 to 790 feet 
(ft) (170 to 241 meters (m)). We used roughness, calculated as 
described in the proposed critical habitat rule (83 FR 67190; December 
28, 2018), as a measure of topographic variation. Subsequently, we 
produced a map of potential spawning habitat by overlaying the spawning 
elevation and roughness layers.
    Finally, when delineating critical habitat that included spawning 
habitat, we considered the dispersal ability of the trispot darter. 
Trispot darters have been recorded to travel approximately 6,000 ft 
(1,829 m) during a spawning season. Therefore, we only delineate lands 
that exhibit topographic characteristics we consider suitable for 
trispot darter spawning habitat that are within 6,000 ft (1,829 m) of a 
trispot darter observation between November and April in the years 2007 
to 2017.
    The following rivers and streams meet the criteria described above 
and are considered occupied by the species at the time of listing where 
the essential physical and biological features are found: Big Canoe 
Creek, Ballplay Creek, Conasauga River, Mill Creek, Coahulla Creek, and 
Coosawattee River.

Areas Outside the Geographical Area Occupied at the Time of Listing

    We may designate as critical habitat areas outside the geographical 
area occupied as listing only if we determine that such areas are 
essential for the conservation of the species. We may consider 
unoccupied areas to be essential only where we determine that a 
designation limited to geographical areas occupied by the species would 
be inadequate to ensure the conservation of the species.
    We are not designating any areas outside the geographical area 
currently occupied by the species because we did not find any 
unoccupied areas that were essential for the conservation of the 
species. Protection of six moderately or highly resilient management 
units across the physiographic representation of the range, all of 
which are currently occupied by the species, will sufficiently reduce 
the risk of extinction. Improving the resiliency of populations in the 
currently occupied streams will likely increase viability to the point 
that the protections of the Act are no longer necessary.

Critical Habitat Maps

    When determining critical habitat boundaries, we make every effort 
to avoid including developed areas such as lands covered by buildings, 
pavement, and other structures because such lands lack physical or 
biological features necessary for the trispot darter. The scale of the 
maps we prepare under the parameters for publication within the Code of 
Federal Regulations may not reflect the exclusion of such developed 
lands. Any such lands inadvertently left inside critical habitat 
boundaries shown on the maps of this rule have been excluded by text in 
the rule and are not designated as critical habitat. Therefore, a 
Federal action involving these lands will not trigger section 7 
consultation with respect to critical habitat and the requirement of no 
adverse modification

[[Page 61625]]

unless the specific action will affect the physical or biological 
features in the adjacent critical habitat. We are designating critical 
habitat in areas within the geographical area occupied by the species 
at the time of listing in 2018. We are not designating any areas 
outside the geographical area occupied by the species at the time of 
listing.
    The critical habitat designation is defined by the map or maps, as 
modified by any accompanying regulatory text, presented below under 
Regulation Promulgation. We include more detailed information on the 
boundaries of the critical habitat designation in the discussion of 
individual units, below. We will make the coordinates or plot points or 
both on which each map is based available to the public on <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a> under Docket No. FWS-R4-ES-2018-0073.

Final Critical Habitat Designation

    We are designating 175.4 river or stream miles (mi) (282.3 
kilometers (km)) and 9,929 acres (ac) (4,018 hectares (ha)) in six 
units as critical habitat for the trispot darter. These six critical 
habitat areas, described below, constitute our current best assessment 
of areas that meet the definition of critical habitat for the trispot 
darter. All of these areas are in the Coosa River system in Alabama, 
Georgia, and Tennessee. Table 2 shows the name, land ownership, 
approximate stream miles, and acres of the designated units for the 
trispot darter. Per State regulations (Alabama Code section 9-11-80, 
Tennessee Code Annotated section 69-1-101, and Georgia Code section 52-
1-31), navigable waters are considered public rights-of-way. Lands 
beneath the navigable waters included in this rule are owned by the 
States of Alabama, Georgia, or Tennessee. Ownership of lands beneath 
nonnavigable waters included in this rule are determined by riparian 
land ownership. As discussed below, riparian lands along the waters 
described are owned by either private, State, or Federal entities.

                                           Table 2--Ownership of Critical Habitat Units for the Trispot Darter
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                        Ownership * of river or stream miles  (kilometers)                Ownership of acres  (hectares)
                  Unit                   ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Private          Local           State          Federal          Total          Private          Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Big Canoe Creek......................         41 (66)               0               0               0          41(66)   5,286 (2,139)   5,286 (2,139)
2. Ballplay Creek.......................         17 (27)               0               0               0         17 (27)   2,527 (1,023)   2,527 (1,023)
3. Conasauga River......................     54.6 (87.8)               0       2.4 (3.9)               0         57 (92)     1,400 (567)     1,400 (567)
4. Mill Creek...........................      8.1 (13.0)       1.3 (2.1)               0               0      9.4 (15.1)               0               0
5. Coahulla Creek.......................         26 (42)               0               0               0         26 (42)       716 (290)       716 (290)
6. Coosawattee River....................     24.2 (39.0)               0       0.3 (0.6)     0.42 (0.68)       25 (40.2)               0               0
    Totals..............................     170.9 (275)       1.3 (2.1)       2.7 (4.5)     0.42 (0.68)   175.4 (282.3)   9,929 (4,018)   9,929 (4,018)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Adjacent riparian ownership is reported under river or stream miles.
Note: Measurements may not sum due to rounding.

    There may be some small perennially dry areas misidentified by our 
digital elevation model analysis as spawning habitat that are included 
inside critical habitat boundaries shown on the maps. Any such lands 
inadvertently left inside critical habitat boundaries shown on the maps 
of this rule are not being designated as critical habitat.
    Below, we present brief descriptions of all units, and reasons why 
they meet the definition of critical habitat for the trispot darter. 
All units are currently occupied by the darter and contain the physical 
and biological features that are essential to the conservation of the 
species and which may require special management considerations or 
protection.

Unit 1: Big Canoe Creek

    Unit 1 consists of 41 stream mi (66 km) in St. Clair County, 
Alabama, from approximately 3.5 mi (5.6 km) upstream of Pinedale Road, 
west of Ashville, Alabama, to approximately U.S. Highway (Hwy.) 11. In 
addition to Big Canoe Creek, Unit 1 includes the westernmost portion of 
Little Canoe Creek to State Hwy. 174 and all of its associated 
tributaries. Unit 1 also includes all low-elevation areas (5,286 ac 
(2,139 ha)) containing channels that hold water from November through 
April beginning 0.5 mi (0.8 km) upstream of County Road 31 upstream to 
the U.S. Hwy. 11 crossing with Big Canoe Creek, approximately 0.70 
miles (1.1 km) downstream of the Interstate 59 (I-59) crossing with the 
Left Hand Prong Little Canoe Creek, and the State Hwy. 174 crossing 
with Little Canoe Creek and Stovall Branch. The low-elevation riparian 
areas that hold water seasonally in Unit 1 are privately owned, except 
for bridge crossings and road easements, which are owned by the State 
or County.
    Additional special management considerations or protection may be 
required within Unit 1 to alleviate impacts from stressors that have 
led to the degradation of the habitat, including roadside erosion, 
urban development, fish barriers, and unstable stream banks. Livestock 
accessing streams and riparian buffers have led to high levels of 
sedimentation, siltation, contamination, and nutrient-loading, as well 
as destabilized stream banks.

Unit 2: Ballplay Creek

    Unit 2 consists of 17 stream mi (27 km) of Ballplay Creek in 
Etowah, Cherokee, and Calhoun Counties, Alabama, and 2,527 ac (1,023 
ha) of ephemeral spawning habitat. Unit 2 begins upstream of a wetland 
complex located at the border between Etowah and Cherokee Counties 
approximately at County Road 32, and continues upstream approximately 
to the U.S. Hwy. 278 crossing over Ballplay Creek in Calhoun County, 
Alabama. Unit 2 includes all low-elevation areas (2,527 ac (1,023 ha)) 
containing channels that hold water from November through April 
beginning upstream of a wetland complex located at the border between 
Etowah and Cherokee Counties approximately 0.60 mi (1 km) southwest of 
County Road 32 and extending upstream to the confluence of Ballplay and 
Little Ballplay Creeks and to the west along Rocky Ford Road and Alford 
Road. The spawning habitat in Unit 2 is privately owned except for 
bridge crossings and road easements, which are owned by the State or 
Counties. Additional special management considerations or protection 
may be required within Unit 2 because entrenchment and channelization 
have altered the channel and may degrade spawning habitat and reduce 
floodplain access.

[[Page 61626]]

Unit 3: Conasauga River

    Unit 3 consists of 57 stream mi (92 km) and 1,400 ac (567 ha) of 
ephemeral wetland spawning habitat in Whitfield and Murray Counties, 
Georgia, and Polk and Bradley Counties, Tennessee. Unit 3 begins in the 
Conasauga River upstream of the mouth of Coahulla Creek and continues 
upstream to the mouth of Minneawauga Creek.
    Unit 3 also includes: Mill Creek from its confluence with the 
Conasauga River in Bradley County, Tennessee, upstream to the first 
impoundment on Mill Creek approximately at Green Shadow Road SE; Old 
Fort Creek from Ladd Springs Road SE in Polk County, Tennessee, to its 
confluence with Mill Creek in Bradley County, Tennessee; and Perry 
Creek from its headwaters (approximately 0.35 mi (0.6 km) upstream of 
Tennga Gregory Road) to its confluence with the Conasauga River in 
Murray County, Georgia, and both of its tributaries. Unit 3 includes 
all low-elevation areas (1,400 ac (567 ha)) containing channels that 
hold water from November through April, beginning from the confluence 
of the Conasauga River and Shears Branch (west of U.S. Hwy. 411 in Polk 
County, Tennessee) to approximately 0.30 mi (0.5 km) downstream of the 
confluence of the Conasauga River and Perry Creek; Mill Creek from 
Hicks Tanyard Road downstream to its confluence with the Conasauga 
River; Old Fort Creek from Hicks Tanyard Road to its confluence with 
Mill Creek; and Perry Creek. The ephemeral wetland areas surrounding 
the river in this unit include a combination of private ownership, 
conservation easements, and State Natural Areas. The easements are held 
by Georgia Department of Transportation, Georgia Department of Natural 
Resources, and Georgia-Alabama Land trust.
    Additional special management considerations or protection may be 
required within the Conasauga River Unit to reduce impacts from 
pollutants from agricultural runoff, construction of farm ponds that 
destroy spawning habitat, development, erosion, sedimentation, and dams 
and other barriers to dispersal.

Unit 4: Mill Creek

    Unit 4 consists of 9.4 stream mi (15.1 km) of Mill Creek in 
Whitfield County, Georgia. The land surrounding the river in this unit 
is both in private ownership and owned by the City of Dalton, Georgia. 
Unit 4 begins at the confluence of Mill Creek with Coahulla Creek and 
continues upstream along Mill Creek for approximately 9.4 mi (15.1 km) 
to the U.S. Hwy. 41 crossing.
    Additional special management considerations or protection may be 
required within Unit 4 to address pollutants from agricultural runoff, 
agricultural ditching, and the construction of ponds that remove 
potential spawning habitat. Sediment loading and excessive livestock 
fecal contamination have degraded water quality and also require 
special management considerations.

Unit 5: Coahulla Creek

    Unit 5 consists of 26 stream mi (42 km) of Coahulla Creek and 716 
ac (290 ha) of ephemeral spawning habitat in Whitfield County, Georgia, 
and Bradley County, Tennessee. Unit 5 begins immediately upstream of 
the Prater Mill dam upstream of State Hwy. 2 in Georgia. The unit 
continues upstream for approximately 26 mi (42 km) to Ramsey Bridge 
Road SE and includes ephemeral wetland habitat from 0.5 mi (0.8 km) 
downstream of Hopewell Road to approximately 0.5 mi (0.8 km) upstream 
of McGaughey Chapel Road. The ephemeral spawning habitat surrounding 
the river in this unit is privately owned except for bridge crossings 
and road easements, which are owned by the State or County.
    Additional special management considerations or protection may be 
required within Unit 5 to address pollutants from agricultural runoff, 
agricultural ditching, and the construction of farm ponds that remove 
spawning habitat. Sediment loading and excessive livestock fecal 
contamination have degraded water quality and also require special 
management considerations.

Unit 6: Coosawattee River

    Unit 6 consists of 25 stream mi (40.2 km) of the Coosawattee River 
beginning at the confluence with the Conasauga River in Gordon County, 
Georgia. The unit continues upstream to Old Highway 411 downstream of 
Carters Lake Reregulation Dam in Murray County, Georgia. The ephemeral 
spawning habitat surrounding the river in this unit is a mix of State, 
private, and Federal (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers) ownership.
    Additional special management considerations or protection may be 
required within Unit 6 to address erosion and sedimentation from urban 
runoff and development, rural unpaved roads, dam construction and use, 
and agriculture, leading to impairment of water quality.

Effects of Critical Habitat Designation

Section 7 Consultation

    Section 7(a)(2) of the Act requires Federal agencies, including the 
Service, to ensure that any action they fund, authorize, or carry out 
is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered 
species or threatened species or result in the destruction or adverse 
modification of designated critical habitat of such species. In 
addition, section 7(a)(4) of the Act requires Federal agencies to 
confer with the Service on any agency action that is likely to 
jeopardize the continued existence of any species proposed to be listed 
under the Act or result in the destruction or adverse modification of 
proposed critical habitat.
    We published a final regulation with a revised definition of 
destruction or adverse modification on August 27, 2019 (84 FR 44976). 
Destruction or adverse modification means a direct or indirect 
alteration that appreciably diminishes the value of critical habitat as 
a whole for the conservation of a listed species.
    If a Federal action may affect a listed species' critical habitat, 
the responsible Federal agency (action agency) must enter into 
consultation with us. Examples of actions that are subject to the 
section 7 consultation process are actions on State, tribal, local, or 
private lands that require a Federal permit (such as a permit from the 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Clean Water Act 
(33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) or a permit from the Service under section 10 
of the Act) or that involve some other Federal action (such as funding 
from the Federal Highway Administration, Federal Aviation 
Administration, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency). Federal 
actions not affecting listed species or critical habitat--and actions 
on State, tribal, local, or private lands that are not federally 
funded, authorized, or carried out by a Federal agency--do not require 
section 7 consultation.
    Compliance with the requirements of section 7(a)(2), is documented 
through our issuance of:
    (1) A concurrence letter for Federal actions that may affect, but 
are not likely to adversely affect, critical habitat; or
    (2) A biological opinion for Federal actions that may affect, and 
are likely to adversely affect, critical habitat.
    When we issue a biological opinion concluding that a project is 
likely to destroy or adversely modify critical habitat, we provide 
reasonable and prudent alternatives to the project, if

[[Page 61627]]

any are identifiable, that would avoid the likelihood of destruction or 
adverse modification of critical habitat. We define ``reasonable and 
prudent alternatives'' (50 CFR 402.02) as alternative actions 
identified during consultation that:
    (1) Can be implemented in a manner consistent with the intended 
purpose of the action,
    (2) Can be implemented consistent with the scope of the Federal 
agency's legal authority and jurisdiction,
    (3) Are economically and technologically feasible, and
    (4) Would, in the Director's opinion, avoid the likelihood of 
destroying or adversely modifying critical habitat.
    Reasonable and prudent alternatives can vary from slight project 
modifications to extensive redesign or relocation of the project. Costs 
associated with implementing a reasonable and prudent alternative are 
similarly variable.
    Regulations at 50 CFR 402.16 set forth requirements for Federal 
agencies to reinitiate formal consultation on previously reviewed 
actions. These requirements apply when the Federal agency has retained 
discretionary involvement or control over the action (or the agency's 
discretionary involvement or control is authorized by law) and, 
subsequent to the previous consultation, we have listed a new species 
or designated critical habitat that may be affected by the Federal 
action, or the action has been modified in a manner that affects the 
species or critical habitat in a way not considered in the previous 
consultation. In such situations, Federal agencies sometimes may need 
to request reinitiation of consultation with us, but the regulations 
also specify some exceptions to the requirement to reinitiate 
consultation on specific land management plans after subsequently 
listing a new species or designating new critical habitat. See the 
regulations for a description of those exceptions.

Application of the ``Adverse Modification'' Standard

    The key factor related to the destruction or adverse modification 
determination is whether implementation of the proposed Federal action 
directly or indirectly alters the designated critical habitat in a way 
that appreciably diminishes the value of the critical habitat as a 
whole for the conservation of the listed species. As discussed above, 
the role of critical habitat is to support physical or biological 
features essential to the conservation of a listed species and provide 
for the conservation of the species.
    Section 4(b)(8) of the Act requires us to briefly evaluate and 
describe, in any proposed or final regulation that designates critical 
habitat, activities involving a Federal action that may violate 7(a)(2) 
of the Act by destroying or adversely modifying such habitat, or that 
may be affected by such designation.
    Activities that the Services may, during a consultation under 
section 7(a)(2) of the Act, find are likely to destroy or adversely 
modify critical habitat include, but are not limited to:
    (1) Actions that would alter the minimum flow or the existing flow 
regime. Such activities could include, but are not limited to, 
impoundment, channelization, water diversion, and water withdrawal. 
These activities could eliminate or reduce the habitat necessary for 
the growth and reproduction of the trispot darter by decreasing or 
altering seasonal flows to levels that would adversely affect the 
species' ability to complete its life cycle.
    (2) Actions that would significantly alter water chemistry or 
quality. Such activities could include, but are not limited to, release 
of chemicals (including pharmaceuticals, metals, herbicides, and 
pesticides) or biological pollutants into the surface water or 
connected groundwater at a point source or by dispersed release (non-
point source). These activities could alter water conditions to levels 
that are beyond the tolerances of the trispot darter and result in 
direct or cumulative adverse effects to individuals and their life 
cycles.
    (3) Actions that would significantly increase sediment deposition 
within the stream channel. Such activities could include, but are not 
limited to, excessive sedimentation from livestock grazing, road 
construction, channel alteration, timber harvest, off-road vehicle use, 
and other watershed and floodplain disturbances. These activities could 
eliminate or reduce the habitat necessary for the growth and 
reproduction of the trispot darter by increasing the sediment 
deposition to levels that would adversely affect the species' ability 
to complete its life cycle.
    (4) Actions that would significantly increase eutrophic conditions. 
Such activities could include, but are not limited to, release of 
nutrients into the surface water or connected groundwater at a point 
source or by dispersed release (non-point source). These activities 
could result in excessive nutrients and algae filling streams and 
reducing habitat, degrading water quality from excessive nutrients and 
during algae decay, and decreasing oxygen levels below the tolerances 
of the trispot darter.
    (5) Actions that would significantly alter channel morphology or 
geometry, or decrease connectivity. Such activities could include, but 
are not limited to, channelization, impoundment, road and bridge 
construction, mining, dredging, and destruction of riparian vegetation. 
These activities may lead to changes in water flows and levels that 
would degrade or eliminate the trispot darter and its habitats. These 
actions could also lead to increased sedimentation and degradation in 
water quality to levels beyond the tolerances of the trispot darter.
    (6) Actions that result in the introduction, spread, or 
augmentation of nonnative aquatic species in occupied stream segments, 
or in stream segments that are hydrologically connected to occupied 
stream segments, or introduction of other species that compete with or 
prey on the trispot darter. Possible actions could include, but are not 
limited to, stocking of nonnative fishes and crayfishes, stocking of 
sport fish, or other related actions. These activities could introduce 
parasites or disease; result in direct predation or direct competition; 
or affect the growth, reproduction, and survival of the trispot darter.

Exemptions

Application of Section 4(a)(3) of the Act

    Section 4(a)(3)(B)(i) of the Act (16 U.S.C. 1533(a)(3)(B)(i)) 
provides that ``The Secretary shall not designate as critical habitat 
any lands or other geographical areas owned or controlled by the 
Department of Defense, or designated for its use, that are subject to 
an integrated natural resources management plan [INRMP] prepared under 
section 101 of the Sikes Act (16 U.S.C. 670a), if the Secretary 
determines in writing that such plan provides a benefit to the species 
for which critical habitat is proposed for designation.'' There are no 
Department of Defense lands with a completed INRMP within the final 
critical habitat designation for the trispot darter.

Exclusions

Consideration of Impacts Under Section 4(b)(2) of the Act

    Section 4(b)(2) of the Act states that the Secretary shall 
designate and make revisions to critical habitat on the basis of the 
best available scientific data after taking into consideration the 
economic impact, national security impact, and any other relevant 
impact of specifying any particular area as critical habitat.

[[Page 61628]]

The Secretary may exclude an area from critical habitat if he 
determines that the benefits of such exclusion outweigh the benefits of 
specifying such area as part of the critical habitat, unless he 
determines, based on the best scientific data available, that the 
failure to designate such area as critical habitat will result in the 
extinction of the species. In making that determination, the statute on 
its face, as well as the legislative history, are clear that the 
Secretary has broad discretion regarding which factor(s) to use and how 
much weight to give to any factor.

Consideration of Economic Impacts

    Section 4(b)(2) of the Act and its implementing regulations require 
that we consider the economic impact that may result from a designation 
of critical habitat. To consider economic impacts, we prepared an 
incremental effects memorandum (IEM) and screening analysis which, 
together with our narrative and interpretation of effects, constitute 
our final economic analysis (FEA) of the critical habitat designation 
and related factors (IEc 2018, entire). Additional information relevant 
to the probable incremental economic impacts of critical habitat 
designation for the trispot darter is summarized below.
    The final critical habitat designation for the trispot darter 
totals approximately 175.4 mi (282.3 km) of streams and rivers and 
9,929 ac (4,018 ha) of spawning areas, all occupied at the time of 
listing. This final critical habitat designation is likely to result 
annually in a maximum of one formal section 7 consultation, three 
informal section 7 consultations, and two technical assistance efforts 
at a total incremental cost of less than $13,000 per year. Because all 
designated critical habitat is in the range occupied by the trispot 
darter, any actions that may affect critical habitat will likely also 
affect the species. Therefore, it is unlikely that any additional 
conservation efforts will be required to address the adverse 
modification standard over and above those recommended as necessary to 
avoid jeopardizing the continued existence of the species. The only 
additional costs expected due to the critical habitat designation are 
administrative costs to consider adverse modification, which are 
incurred by both the Federal action agency and the Service.

Exclusions Based on Economic Impacts

    As discussed above, the Service considered the economic impacts of 
the critical habitat designation, and the Secretary is not exercising 
his discretion to exclude any areas from this designation of critical 
habitat for the trispot darter based on economic impacts. A copy of the 
IEM and screening analysis with supporting documents may be obtained by 
contacting the Alabama Ecological Services Field Office (see ADDRESSES) 
or by downloading from the internet at <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a>.

Exclusions Based on Impacts on National Security and Homeland Security

    Section 4(a)(3)(B)(i) of the Act may not cover all Department of 
Defense (DoD) lands or areas that pose potential national-security 
concerns (e.g., a DoD installation that is in the process of revising 
its INRMP for a newly listed species or a species previously not 
covered). If a particular area is not covered under section 
4(a)(3)(B)(i), national-security or homeland-security concerns are not 
a factor in the process of determining what areas meet the definition 
of ``critical habitat.'' Nevertheless, when designating critical 
habitat under section 4(b)(2), the Service must consider impacts on 
national security, including homeland security, on lands or areas not 
covered by section 4(a)(3)(B)(i). Accordingly, we will always consider 
for exclusion from the designation areas for which DoD, Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS), or another Federal agency has requested 
exclusion based on an assertion of national-security or homeland-
security concerns. No lands within the designation of critical habitat 
for trispot darter are owned or managed by DoD or DHS. Consequently, 
the Secretary is not exercising his discretion to exclude any areas 
from this final designation based on impacts on national security.

Exclusions Based on Other Relevant Impacts

    Under section 4(b)(2) of the Act, we consider any other relevant 
impacts, in addition to economic impacts and impacts on national 
security. We consider a number of factors including whether there are 
permitted conservation plans covering the species in the area, such as 
habitat conservation plans, safe harbor agreements, or candidate 
conservation agreements with assurances, or whether there are non-
permitted conservation agreements and partnerships that would be 
encouraged by designation of, or exclusion from, critical habitat. In 
addition, we look at the existence of tribal conservation plans and 
partnerships and consider the government-to-government relationship of 
the United States with tribal entities. We also consider any social 
impacts that might occur because of the designation.
    In preparing this final rule, we have determined that there are 
currently no permitted conservation plans or other non-permitted 
conservation agreements or partnerships for the trispot darter, and the 
final critical habitat designation does not include any tribal lands or 
trust resources. We anticipate no impact on tribal lands, partnerships, 
or permitted or non-permitted plans or agreements from this critical 
habitat designation. Accordingly, the Secretary is not exercising his 
discretion to exclude any areas from the final designation based on 
other relevant impacts.

Required Determinations

Regulatory Planning and Review (Executive Orders 12866 and 13563)

    Executive Order 12866 provides that the Office of Information and 
Regulatory Affairs in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) will 
review all significant rules. The Office of Information and Regulatory 
Affairs has determined that this rule is not significant.
    Executive Order (E.O.) 13563 reaffirms the principles of E.O. 12866 
while calling for improvements in the nation's regulatory system to 
promote predictability, to reduce uncertainty, and to use the best, 
most innovative, and least burdensome tools for achieving regulatory 
ends. The executive order directs agencies to consider regulatory 
approaches that reduce burdens and maintain flexibility and freedom of 
choice for the public where these approaches are relevant, feasible, 
and consistent with regulatory objectives. E.O. 13563 emphasizes 
further that regulations must be based on the best available science 
and that the rulemaking process must allow for public participation and 
an open exchange of ideas. We have developed this rule in a manner 
consistent with these requirements.

Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.)

    Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA; 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), 
as amended by the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 
1996 (SBREFA; 5 U.S.C. 801 et seq.), whenever an agency is required to 
publish a notice of rulemaking for any proposed or final rule, it must 
prepare and make available for public comment a regulatory flexibility 
analysis that describes the effects of the rule on small entities 
(i.e., small businesses, small organizations, and small government 
jurisdictions). However, no regulatory

[[Page 61629]]

flexibility analysis is required if the head of the agency certifies 
the rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial 
number of small entities. The SBREFA amended the RFA to require Federal 
agencies to provide a certification statement of the factual basis for 
certifying that the rule will not have a significant economic impact on 
a substantial number of small entities.
    According to the Small Business Administration, small entities 
include small organizations such as independent nonprofit 
organizations; small governmental jurisdictions, including school 
boards and city and town governments that serve fewer than 50,000 
residents; and small businesses (13 CFR 121.201). Small businesses 
include manufacturing and mining concerns with fewer than 500 
employees, wholesale trade entities with fewer than 100 employees, 
retail and service businesses with less than $5 million in annual 
sales, general and heavy construction businesses with less than $27.5 
million in annual business, special trade contractors doing less than 
$11.5 million in annual business, and agricultural businesses with 
annual sales less than $750,000. To determine whether potential 
economic impacts to these small entities are significant, we considered 
the types of activities that might trigger regulatory impacts under 
this designation as well as types of project modifications that may 
result. In general, the term ``significant economic impact'' is meant 
to apply to a typical small business firm's business operations.
    Under the RFA, as amended, and as understood in light of recent 
court decisions, Federal agencies are required to evaluate only the 
potential incremental impacts of rulemaking on those entities directly 
regulated by the rulemaking itself; in other words, the RFA does not 
require agencies to evaluate the potential impacts to indirectly 
regulated entities. The regulatory mechanism through which critical 
habitat protections are realized is section 7 of the Act, which 
requires Federal agencies, in consultation with the Service, to ensure 
that any action authorized, funded, or carried out by the agency is not 
likely to destroy or adversely modify critical habitat. Therefore, 
under section 7, only Federal action agencies are directly subject to 
the specific regulatory requirement (avoiding destruction and adverse 
modification) imposed by critical habitat designation. Consequently, it 
is our position that only Federal action agencies will be directly 
regulated by this designation. There is no requirement under the RFA to 
evaluate the potential impacts to entities not directly regulated. 
Moreover, Federal agencies are not small entities. Therefore, because 
no small entities will be directly regulated by this rulemaking, the 
Service certifies that this critical habitat designation will not have 
a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities 
and a regulatory flexibility analysis is not required.

Executive Order 13771

    This rule is not an E.O. 13771 (``Reducing Regulation and 
Controlling Regulatory Costs'') (82 FR 9339, February 3, 2017) 
regulatory action because this rule is not significant under E.O. 
12866.

Energy Supply, Distribution, or Use--Executive Order 13211

    Executive Order 13211 (Actions Concerning Regulations That 
Significantly Affect Energy Supply, Distribution, or Use) requires 
agencies to prepare Statements of Energy Effects when undertaking 
certain actions. OMB has provided guidance for implementing this E.O. 
that outlines nine outcomes that may constitute ``a significant adverse 
effect'' when compared to not taking the regulatory action under 
consideration. The economic analysis finds that none of these criteria 
is relevant to this analysis. Thus, based on information in the 
economic analysis, energy-related impacts associated with trispot 
darter conservation activities within critical habitat are not 
expected. As such, the designation of critical habitat is not expected 
to significantly affect energy supplies, distribution, or use. 
Therefore, this action is not a significant energy action, and no 
Statement of Energy Effects is required.

Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (2 U.S.C. 1501 et seq.)

    In accordance with the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act (2 U.S.C. 1501 
et seq.), we make the following findings:
    (1) This rule will not produce a Federal mandate. In general, a 
Federal mandate is a provision in legislation, statute, or regulation 
that would impose an enforceable duty upon State, local, or tribal 
governments, or the private sector, and includes both ``Federal 
intergovernmental mandates'' and ``Federal private sector mandates.'' 
These terms are defined in 2 U.S.C. 658(5)-(7). ``Federal 
intergovernmental mandate'' includes a regulation that ``would impose 
an enforceable duty upon State, local, or tribal governments'' with two 
exceptions. It excludes ``a condition of Federal assistance.'' It also 
excludes ``a duty arising from participation in a voluntary Federal 
program,'' unless the regulation ``relates to a then-existing Federal 
program under which $500,000,000 or more is provided annually to State, 
local, and tribal governments under entitlement authority,'' if the 
provision would ``increase the stringency of conditions of assistance'' 
or ``place caps upon, or otherwise decrease, the Federal Government's 
responsibility to provide funding,'' and the State, local, or tribal 
governments ``lack authority'' to adjust accordingly. At the time of 
enactment, these entitlement programs were: Medicaid; Aid to Families 
with Dependent Children work programs; Child Nutrition; Food Stamps; 
Social Services Block Grants; Vocational Rehabilitation State Grants; 
Foster Care, Adoption Assistance, and Independent Living; Family 
Support Welfare Services; and Child Support Enforcement. ``Federal 
private sector mandate'' includes a regulation that ``would impose an 
enforceable duty upon the private sector, except (i) a condition of 
Federal assistance or (ii) a duty arising from participation in a 
voluntary Federal program.''
    The designation of critical habitat does not impose a legally 
binding duty on non-Federal Government entities or private parties. 
Under the Act, the only regulatory effect is that Federal agencies must 
ensure that their actions do not destroy or adversely modify critical 
habitat under section 7. While non-Federal entities that receive 
Federal funding, assistance, or permits, or that otherwise require 
approval or authorization from a Federal agency for an action, may be 
indirectly impacted by the designation of critical habitat, the legally 
binding duty to avoid destruction or adverse modification of critical 
habitat rests squarely on the Federal agency. Furthermore, to the 
extent that non-Federal entities are indirectly impacted because they 
receive Federal assistance or participate in a voluntary Federal aid 
program, the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act would not apply, nor would 
critical habitat shift the costs of the large entitlement programs 
listed above onto State governments.
    (2) We do not believe that this rule will significantly or uniquely 
affect small governments because most of the lands within and adjacent 
to the streams being designated as critical habitat are owned by 
private landowners. These entities do not fit the definition of ``small 
governmental jurisdiction.'' The 4.42 mi (7.28 km) of riparian habitat 
owned by Federal, State, or local governments that we are designating 
as

[[Page 61630]]

critical habitat in this rule are either lands managed for conservation 
or lands already developed. Consequently, we do not believe that the 
critical habitat designation will significantly or uniquely affect 
small government entities. As such, a Small Government Agency Plan is 
not required.

Takings--Executive Order 12630

    In accordance with E.O. 12630 (Government Actions and Interference 
with Constitutionally Protected Private Property Rights), we have 
analyzed the potential takings implications of designating critical 
habitat for the trispot darter in a takings implications assessment. 
The Act does not authorize the Service to regulate private actions on 
private lands or confiscate private property as a result of critical 
habitat designation. Designation of critical habitat does not affect 
land ownership, or establish any closures, or restrictions on use of or 
access to the designated areas. Furthermore, the designation of 
critical habitat does not affect landowner actions that do not require 
Federal funding or permits, nor does it preclude development of habitat 
conservation programs or issuance of incidental take permits to permit 
actions that do require Federal funding or permits to go forward. 
However, Federal agencies are prohibited from carrying out, funding, or 
authorizing actions that would destroy or adversely modify critical 
habitat. A takings implications assessment has been completed and 
concludes that this designation of critical habitat for the trispot 
darter does not pose significant takings implications for lands within 
or affected by the designation.

Federalism--Executive Order 13132

    In accordance with E.O. 13132 (Federalism), this rule does not have 
significant Federalism effects. A federalism summary impact statement 
is not required. In keeping with Department of the Interior and 
Department of Commerce policy, we requested information from, and 
coordinated development of the critical habitat designation with, the 
appropriate State resource agencies. We did not receive comments from 
the States. From a federalism perspective, the designation of critical 
habitat directly affects only the responsibilities of Federal agencies. 
The Act imposes no other duties with respect to critical habitat, 
either for States and local governments, or for anyone else. As a 
result, the rule does not have substantial direct effects either on the 
State, or on the relationship between the national government and the 
State, or on the distribution of powers and responsibilities among the 
various levels of government. The designation may have some benefit to 
these governments because the areas that contain the features essential 
to the conservation of the species are more clearly defined, and the 
physical or biological features of the habitat necessary to the 
conservation of the species are specifically identified. This 
information does not alter where and what federally sponsored 
activities may occur. However, it may assist these local governments in 
long-range planning (because these local governments no longer have to 
wait for case-by-case section 7 consultations to occur).
    Where State and local governments require approval or authorization 
from a Federal agency for actions that may affect critical habitat, 
consultation under section 7(a)(2) will be required. While non-Federal 
entities that receive Federal funding, assistance, or permits, or that 
otherwise require approval or authorization from a Federal agency for 
an action, may be indirectly impacted by the designation of critical 
habitat, the legally binding duty to avoid destruction or adverse 
modification of critical habitat rests squarely on the Federal agency.

Civil Justice Reform--Executive Order 12988

    In accordance with Executive Order 12988 (Civil Justice Reform), 
the Office of the Solicitor has determined that the rule does not 
unduly burden the judicial system and that it meets the requirements of 
sections 3(a) and 3(b)(2) of the Order. We are designating critical 
habitat in accordance with the provisions of the Act. To assist the 
public in understanding the habitat needs of the species, this rule 
identifies the elements of physical or biological features essential to 
the conservation of the species. The designated areas of critical 
habitat are presented on maps, and the rule provides several options 
for the interested public to obtain more detailed location information, 
if desired.

Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.)

    This rule does not contain information collection requirements, and 
a submission to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the 
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.) is not 
required. We may not conduct or sponsor and you are not required to 
respond to a collection of information unless it displays a currently 
valid OMB control number.

National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.)

    It is our position that, outside the jurisdiction of the U.S. Court 
of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, we do not need to prepare 
environmental analyses pursuant to the National Environmental Policy 
Act (NEPA; 42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.) in connection with designating 
critical habitat under the Act. We published a notice outlining our 
reasons for this determination in the Federal Register on October 25, 
1983 (48 FR 49244). This position was upheld by the U.S. Court of 
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit (Douglas County v. Babbitt, 48 F.3d 1495 
(9th Cir. 1995), cert. denied 516 U.S. 1042 (1996)).

Government-to-Government Relationship With Tribes

    In accordance with the President's memorandum of April 29, 1994 
(Government-to-Government Relations with Native American Tribal 
Governments; 59 FR 22951), Executive Order 13175 (Consultation and 
Coordination With Indian Tribal Governments), and the Department of the 
Interior's manual at 512 DM 2, we readily acknowledge our 
responsibility to communicate meaningfully with recognized Federal 
Tribes on a government-to-government basis. In accordance with 
Secretarial Order 3206 of June 5, 1997 (American Indian Tribal Rights, 
Federal-Tribal Trust Responsibilities, and the Endangered Species Act), 
we readily acknowledge our responsibilities to work directly with 
tribes in developing programs for healthy ecosystems, to acknowledge 
that tribal lands are not subject to the same controls as Federal 
public lands, to remain sensitive to Indian culture, and to make 
information available to tribes.
    We have identified no tribal interests that will be affected by 
this rule.

References Cited

    A complete list of references cited in this rule is available on 
the internet at <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a> under Docket No. FWS-R4-ES-
2018-0073 and upon request from the Alabama Ecological Services Field 
Office (see FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT).

Authors

    The primary authors of this rule are the staff members of the U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service's Species Assessment Team and Alabama 
Ecological Services Field Office.

List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 17

    Endangered and threatened species, Exports, Imports, Reporting and

[[Page 61631]]

recordkeeping requirements, Transportation.

Regulation Promulgation

    Accordingly, we amend part 17, subchapter B of chapter I, title 50 
of the Code of Federal Regulations, as set forth below:

PART 17--ENDANGERED AND THREATENED WILDLIFE AND PLANTS

0
1. The authority citation for part 17 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  16 U.S.C. 1361-1407; 1531-1544; and 4201-4245, 
unless otherwise noted.


0
2. Amend Sec.  17.11 in paragraph (h) by revising the entry for 
``Darter, trispot'' under FISHES in the List of Endangered and 
Threatened Wildlife to read as follows:


Sec.  17.11   Endangered and threatened wildlife.

* * * * *
    (h) * * *

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                           Listing citations and
          Common name              Scientific name      Where listed          Status         applicable rules
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
                                                  * * * * * * *
Fishes
 
                                                  * * * * * * *
Darter, trispot................  Etheostoma          Wherever found....  T..............  83 FR 67131, 12/28/
                                  trisella.                                                2018; 50 CFR
                                                                                           17.44(q); \4d\ 50 CFR
                                                                                           17.95(e).\CH\
 
                                                  * * * * * * *
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


0
3. Amend Sec.  17.95 in paragraph (e) by adding an entry for ``Trispot 
Darter (Etheostoma trisella)'' immediately following the entry for 
``Slackwater Darter (Etheostoma boschungi)'', to read as follows:


Sec.  17.95   Critical habitat--fish and wildlife.

* * * * *
    (e) Fishes.
* * * * *
Trispot Darter (Etheostoma Trisella)
    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for St. Clair, Etowah, 
Cherokee, and Calhoun Counties, Alabama; Bradley and Polk Counties, 
Tennessee; and Whitfield, Murray, and Gordon Counties, Georgia, on the 
maps in this entry.
    (2) Within these areas, the physical or biological features 
essential to the conservation of the trispot darter consist of the 
following components:
    (i) Geomorphically stable, small to medium streams with detritus, 
woody debris, and stands of water willow (Justicia americana) over 
stream substrate that consists of small cobble, pebbles, gravel, and 
fine layers of silt; and intact riparian cover to maintain stream 
morphology and reduce erosion and sediment inputs.
    (ii) Adequate seasonal water flows, or a hydrologic flow regime 
(which includes the severity, frequency, duration, and seasonality of 
discharge over time) necessary to maintain appropriate benthic habitats 
and to maintain and create connectivity between permanently flowing 
streams with associated streams that hold water from November through 
April, providing connectivity between the darter's spawning and summer 
areas.
    (iii) Water and sediment quality (including, but not limited to, 
conductivity; hardness; turbidity; temperature; pH; ammonia; heavy 
metals; pesticides; animal waste products; and nitrogen, phosphorus, 
and potassium fertilizers) necessary to sustain natural physiological 
processes for normal behavior, growth, and viability of all life 
stages.
    (iv) Prey base of aquatic macroinvertebrates.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
October 30, 2020. In addition, any lands that are perennially dry areas 
that are located within the critical habitat boundaries shown on the 
maps in this entry are not designated as critical habitat.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 16N coordinates 
and species' occurrence data. The hydrologic data used in the maps were 
extracted from U.S. Geological Survey National Hydrography Dataset High 
Resolution (1:24,000 scale) using Geographic Coordinate System North 
American 1983 coordinates. The maps in this entry, as modified by any 
accompanying regulatory text, establish the boundaries of the critical 
habitat designation. The coordinates or plot points or both on which 
each map is based are available to the public at <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a> under Docket No. FWS-R4-ES-2018-0073.
    (5) Note: Index map follows:

BILLING CODE 4333-15-P

[[Page 61632]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE20.003

    (6) Unit 1: Big Canoe Creek, St. Clair County, Alabama.
    (i) General Description: Unit 1 consists of 41 stream miles (mi) 
(66 kilometers (km)) in St. Clair County, Alabama, from approximately 
3.5 mi (5.6 km) upstream of Pinedale Road, west of Ashville, Alabama, 
to approximately U.S. Highway (Hwy.) 11. In addition to Big Canoe 
Creek, Unit 1 includes the westernmost portion of Little Canoe Creek to 
State Hwy. 174 and all of its associated tributaries. Unit 1 also 
includes all low-elevation areas (5,286 acres (ac) (2,139 hectares 
(ha))) containing channels that hold water from November through April 
beginning 0.5 mi (0.8 km) upstream of County Road 31 upstream to the 
U.S. Hwy. 11 crossing with Big Canoe Creek, approximately 0.70 mi (1.1 
km) downstream of the Interstate 59 (I-59) crossing with the Left Hand 
Prong Little Canoe Creek, and the State Hwy. 174 crossing with Little 
Canoe Creek and Stovall Branch.
    (ii) Map of Unit 1 follows:

[[Page 61633]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE20.004

    (7) Unit 2: Ballplay Creek, Etowah, Cherokee, and Calhoun Counties, 
Alabama.
    (i) Unit 2 consists of 17 stream mi (27 km) of Ballplay Creek in 
Etowah, Cherokee, and Calhoun Counties, Alabama, and 2,527 ac (1,023 
ha) of ephemeral spawning habitat. Unit 2 begins upstream of a wetland 
complex located at the border between Etowah and Cherokee Counties 
approximately at County Road 32, and continues upstream approximately 
to the U.S. Hwy. 278 crossing over Ballplay Creek in Calhoun County, 
Alabama. Unit 2 includes all low-elevation areas containing channels 
that hold water from November through April beginning upstream of the 
wetland complex located at the border between Etowah and Cherokee 
Counties approximately 0.60 mi (1 km) southwest of County Road 32, 
extending upstream to the confluence of Ballplay and Little Ballplay 
Creeks and to the west along Rocky Ford Road and Alford Road.
    (ii) Map of Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 61634]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE20.005

    (8) Unit 3: Conasauga River, Bradley and Polk Counties, Tennessee, 
and Whitfield and Murray Counties, Georgia.
    (i) Unit 3 consists of 57 stream mi (92 km) and 1,400 ac (567 ha) 
of ephemeral wetland spawning habitat in Whitfield and Murray Counties, 
Georgia, and Polk and Bradley Counties, Tennessee. Unit 3 begins in the 
Conasauga River upstream of the mouth of Coahulla Creek and continues 
upstream to the mouth of Minneawauga Creek. Unit 3 also includes Mill 
Creek, from its confluence with the Conasauga River in Bradley County, 
Tennessee, upstream to the first impoundment on Mill Creek 
approximately at Green Shadow Road SE; Old Fort Creek, from Ladd 
Springs Road SE in Polk County, Tennessee, to its confluence with Mill 
Creek in Bradley County, Tennessee; and Perry Creek, from its 
headwaters (approximately 0.35 mi (0.6 km) upstream of Tennga Gregory 
Road) to its confluence with the Conasauga River in Murray County, 
Georgia, and both of its tributaries. Unit 3 includes all low-elevation 
areas containing channels that hold water from November through April, 
beginning from the confluence of the Conasauga River and Shears Branch 
(west of U.S. Hwy. 411 in Polk County, Tennessee) to approximately 0.30 
mi (0.5 km) downstream of the confluence of the Conasauga River and 
Perry Creek; Mill Creek from Hicks Tanyard Road downstream to its 
confluence with the Conasauga River; Old Fort Creek from

[[Page 61635]]

Hicks Tanyard Road to its confluence with Mill Creek; and Perry Creek.
    (ii) Map of Unit 3 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE20.006
    
    (9) Unit 4: Mill Creek, Whitfield County, Georgia.
    (i) Unit 4 consists of 9.4 stream mi (15.1 km) of Mill Creek in 
Whitfield County, Georgia. Unit 4 begins at the confluence of Mill 
Creek with Coahulla Creek and continues upstream along Mill Creek for 
approximately 9.4 mi (15.1 km) to the U.S. Hwy. 41 crossing.
    (ii) Map of Unit 4 follows:

[[Page 61636]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE20.007

    (10) Unit 5: Coahulla Creek, Whitfield County, Georgia, and Bradley 
County, Tennessee.
    (i) Unit 5 consists of 26 stream mi (42 km) of Coahulla Creek and 
716 ac (290 ha) of ephemeral spawning habitat in Whitfield County, 
Georgia, and Bradley County, Tennessee. Unit 5 begins immediately 
upstream of the Prater Mill dam upstream of State Hwy. 2 in Georgia. 
The unit continues upstream for approximately 26 mi (42 km) to Ramsey 
Bridge Road SE and includes ephemeral wetland habitat from 0.5 mi (0.8 
km) downstream of Hopewell Road to approximately 0.5 mi (0.8 km) 
upstream of McGaughey Chapel Road.
    (ii) Map of Unit 5 follows:

[[Page 61637]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE20.008

    (11) Unit 6: Coosawattee River, Gordon and Murray Counties, 
Georgia.
    (i) Unit 6 consists of 25 stream mi (40.2 km) of the Coosawattee 
River beginning at the confluence with the Conasauga River in Gordon 
County, Georgia. The unit continues upstream to Old Highway 411 
downstream of Carters Lake Reregulation Dam in Murray County, Georgia.
    (ii) Map of Unit 6 follows:

[[Page 61638]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR30SE20.009

* * * * *

Aurelia Skipwith,
Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
[FR Doc. 2020-19115 Filed 9-29-20; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4333-15-C


</pre></body>
</html>