<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 75 Issue 38 (Friday, February 26, 2010)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 75, Number 38 (Friday, February 26, 2010)]
[Notices]
[Pages 8909-8916]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2010-3975]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Federal Crop Insurance Corporation


Funding Opportunity Title: Commodity Partnerships for Small 
Agricultural Risk Management Education Sessions (Commodity Partnerships 
Small Sessions Program) Announcement Type: Announcement of Availability 
of Funds and Request for Application for Competitive Cooperative 
Partnership Agreements

    Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number (CFDA): 10.459.

DATES: Electronic applications submitted through <a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a> are due at 
April 27, 2010. Hard copy applications will NOT be accepted.
SUMMARY: The Federal Crop Insurance Corporation (FCIC), operating 
through the Risk Management Agency (RMA), announces the availability of 
approximately $1.1 million (subject to availability of funds) for 
Commodity Partnerships for Small Agricultural Risk Management Education 
Sessions (the Commodity Partnerships Small Sessions Program). The 
purpose of this cooperative partnership agreement program is to deliver 
training and information in management of production, marketing, and 
financial risk to U.S. agricultural producers. The program gives 
priority to educating producers of crops currently not insured under 
Federal crop insurance, specialty crops, and underserved commodities, 
including livestock and forage. A maximum of 110 cooperative 
partnership agreements will be funded, with a minimum of ten in each of 
the ten designated RMA Regions. The maximum award for any cooperative 
partnership agreement will be $10,000. Awardees must demonstrate non-
financial benefits from a cooperative partnership agreement and must 
agree to the substantial involvement of RMA in the project. Funding 
availability for this program may be announced at approximately the 
same time as funding availability for similar but separate programs--
CFDA No. 10.455 (Community Outreach and Assistance Partnerships), and 
CFDA No. 10.458 (Crop Insurance Education in Targeted States). 
Prospective applicants should carefully examine and compare the notices 
for each program.
    The collections of information in this announcement have been 
approved by OMB under control number 0563-0067.

This Announcement Consists of Eight Sections

Section I--Funding Opportunity Description
    A. Legislative Authority
    B. Background
    C. Definition of Priority Commodities
    D. Project Goal
    E. Purpose
Section II--Award Information
    A. Type of Application
    B. Funding Availability
    C. Location and Target Audience
    D. Maximum Award
    E. Project Period
    F. Description of Agreement--Awardee Tasks
    G. RMA Activities
    H. Other Tasks
Section III--Eligibility Information
    A. Eligible Applicants
    B. Cost Sharing or Matching
    C. Other--Non-Financial Benefits
Section IV--Application and Submission Information
    A. Electronic Application Package
    B. Content and Form of Application Submission
    C. Funding Restrictions
    D. Limitation on Use of Project Funds for Salaries and Benefits
    E. Indirect Cost Rates
    F. Other Submission Requirements
    G. Electronic Submissions
    H. Acknowledgement of Applications
Section V--Application Review Information
    A. Criteria
    B. Selection and Review Process
Section VI--Award Administration Information
    A. Award Notices
    B. Administrative and National Policy Requirements
    1. Requirement To Use Program Logo
    2. Requirement To Provide Project Information to an RMA-selected 
Representative
    3. Private Crop Insurance Organizations and Potential Conflicts 
of Interest
    4. Access to Panel Review Information
    5. Confidential Aspects of Applications and Awards
    6. Audit Requirements
    7. Prohibitions and Requirements Regarding Lobbying
    8. Applicable OMB Circulars
    9. Requirement To Assure Compliance With Federal Civil Rights 
Laws
    10. Requirement To Participate in a Post Award Teleconference
    11. Requirement To Submit Educational Materials to the National 
AgRisk Education Library
    12. Requirement To Submit Proposed Results to the National 
AgRisk Education Library
    13. Requirement To Submit a Project Plan of Operation in the 
Event of a Human Pandemic Outbreak
    C. Reporting Requirements
Section VII--Agency Contact
Section VIII--Additional Information
    A. Dun and Bradstreet Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS)
    B. Required Registration With the Central Contract Registry 
(CCR) for Submission of Proposals
    C. Related Programs

Full Text of Announcement

I. Funding Opportunity Description

A. Legislative Authority

    The Commodity Partnerships Small Sessions Program is authorized 
under section 522(d)(3)(F) of the Federal Crop Insurance Act (Act) (7 
U.S.C. 1522(d)(3)(F)).

B. Background

    RMA promotes and regulates sound risk management solutions to 
improve the economic stability of American agriculture. On behalf of 
FCIC, RMA does this by offering Federal crop insurance products through 
a network of private-sector partners, overseeing the creation of new 
risk management products, seeking enhancements in existing products, 
ensuring the integrity of crop insurance programs, offering outreach 
programs aimed at equal access and participation of underserved 
communities, and providing risk management education and information.
    One of RMA's strategic goals is to ensure that its customers are 
well informed as to the risk management solutions available. This 
educational goal is supported by section 522(d)(3)(F) of the Act, which 
authorizes FCIC funding for risk management training and informational 
efforts for agricultural producers through the formation of 
partnerships with public and private

[[Page 8910]]

organizations. With respect to such partnerships, priority is to be 
given to reaching producers of Priority Commodities, as defined below.

C. Definition of Priority Commodities

    For purposes of this program, Priority Commodities are defined as:
    <bullet> Agricultural commodities covered by (7 U.S.C. 7333). 
Commodities in this group are commercial crops that are not covered by 
catastrophic risk protection crop insurance, are used for food or fiber 
(except livestock), and specifically include, but are not limited to, 
floricultural, ornamental nursery, Christmas trees, turf grass sod, 
aquaculture (including ornamental fish), and industrial crops.
    <bullet> Specialty crops. Commodities in this group may or may not 
be covered under a Federal crop insurance plan and include, but are not 
limited to, fruits, vegetables, tree nuts, syrups, honey, roots, herbs, 
and highly specialized varieties of traditional crops.
    <bullet> Underserved commodities. This group includes: (a) 
Commodities, including livestock and forage, that are covered by a 
Federal crop insurance plan but for which participation in an area is 
below the national average; and (b) commodities, including livestock 
and forage, with inadequate crop insurance coverage.
    A project is considered as giving priority to Priority Commodities 
if 75 percent of the educational activities of the project are directed 
to producers of any of the three classes of commodities listed above or 
any combination of the three classes.

D. Project Goal

    The goal of this program is to ensure that ``* * * producers will 
be better able to use financial management, crop insurance, marketing 
contracts, and other existing and emerging risk management tools.''

E. Purpose

    The purpose of the Commodity Partnership Small Session Program is 
to provide U.S. farmers and ranchers with training and informational 
opportunities to be able to understand:
    <bullet> The kinds of risks addressed by existing and emerging risk 
management tools;
    <bullet> The features and appropriate use of existing and emerging 
risk management tools; and
    <bullet> How to make sound risk management decisions.
    In addition, for 2010, the FCIC Board of Directors and the FCIC 
Manager are seeking projects that also include the Special Emphasis 
Topics listed below which highlight the educational priorities with 
each of the ten RMA Regional Offices:
    <bullet> Billings, Montana Regional Office (MT, ND, SD, and WY)--
Pasture, Rangeland, Forage, Livestock Gross Margin, Specialty Crops, 
Underserved Commodities, and 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic 
Provisions; and various crop insurance provisions.
    <bullet> Davis, California Regional Office (AZ, CA, HI, NV, and 
UT)--Apiculture program, drought mitigation and lack of irrigation 
water, risk management tools for invasive pests, Specialty Crops, 
Hawaii Tropical Fruits and Trees, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, 
Basic Provisions and various crop insurance provisions, and risk 
management tools to maximize strategic solutions for using Farm Service 
Agency and RMA programs.
    <bullet> Jackson, Mississippi Regional Office (AR, KY, LA, MS, and 
TN)--AGR-Lite Insurance tools (TN), Nursery Price Endorsement Crop 
Insurance (all States), Nursery Insurance Tools (all States), 2011 
Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions and various crop 
insurance provisions, and Specialty Crops.
    <bullet> Oklahoma City, Oklahoma Regional Office (NM, OK, and TX)--
Native American issues and Limited English Proficiency (all States), 
Specialty Crops, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provision 
and various crop insurance provisions.
    <bullet> Raleigh, North Carolina Regional Office (CT, DE, MA, MD, 
ME, NC, NH, NJ, NY, PA, RI, VA, VT, and WV)--2011 Final Common Crop 
Regulations, Basic Provision and various crop insurance provisions.
    <bullet> Connecticut--LGM Dairy Cattle, Northern Potatoes, Apples, 
Specialty Crops, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions 
and various crop insurance provisions, and Nursery Crop Insurance 
Tools.
    <bullet> Delaware--LGM Dairy Cattle, Southern Potatoes, Specialty 
Crops and 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions and 
various crop insurance provisions, and Nursery Crop Insurance Tools.
    <bullet> Maine--LGM Dairy Cattle, Northern Potatoes, Apples, 
Specialty Crops, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions 
and various crop insurance provisions, and Nursery Crop Insurance 
Tools.
    <bullet> Maryland--LGM Dairy Cattle, Southern Potatoes, Apples, 
Specialty Crops, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions 
and various crop insurance provisions, and Nursery Crop Insurance 
Tools.
    <bullet> Massachusetts--LGM Dairy Cattle, Northern Potatoes, 
Apples, Specialty Crops, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic 
Provisions and various crop insurance provisions and Nursery Crop 
Insurance Tools.
    <bullet> New Hampshire--LGM Dairy Cattle, Apples, Specialty Crops, 
2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions and various crop 
insurance provisions, and Nursery Crop Insurance Tools.
    <bullet> New Jersey--LGM Dairy Cattle, Southern Potatoes, Apples, 
Specialty Crops, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions 
and various crop insurance provisions, and Nursery Crop Insurance 
Tools.
    <bullet> New York--Specialty Crops, Apiculture Vegetation Index, 
LGM Dairy Cattle, Pasture Rangeland Forage Vegetation Index, Northern 
Potatoes, Apples, Cabbage, Grapes, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, 
Basic Provisions and various crop insurance provisions, and Nursery 
Crop Insurance Tools.
    <bullet> North Carolina--Specialty Crops, Apiculture, Pasture 
Rangeland Forage Vegetation Index, LRP for Feeder Cattle, Fed Cattle, 
Lamb, and Swine, Southern Potatoes, Apples, Cabbage, Grapes, 2011 Final 
Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions and various crop insurance 
provisions, and Nursery Crop Insurance Tools.
    <bullet> Pennsylvania--Specialty Crops, Apiculture, LGM Dairy 
Cattle, Pasture Rangeland Forage, Northern Potatoes, Apples, Cabbage, 
Grapes, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions and 
various crop insurance provisions, and Nursery Crop Insurance Tools.
    <bullet> Rhode Island--Specialty Crops, LGM Dairy Cattle, Northern 
Potatoes, Apples, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions 
and various crop insurance provisions, and Nursery Crop Insurance 
Tools.
    <bullet> Virginia--Specialty Crops, Apiculture, Pasture Rangeland 
Forage, LRP for Feeder Cattle, Fed Cattle, Lamb, Swine, Southern 
Potatoes, Apples, Cabbage, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic 
Provisions and various crop insurance provisions, and Nursery Crop 
Insurance Tools.
    <bullet> Vermont--Specialty Crops, LGM Dairy Cattle, Northern 
Potatoes, Apples, 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions 
and various crop insurance provisions, and Nursery Crop Insurance 
Tools.
    <bullet> West Virginia--Specialty Crops, LGM Dairy Cattle, Apples, 
2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions and various crop 
insurance

[[Page 8911]]

provisions, and Nursery Crop Insurance Tools.
    <bullet> Spokane, Washington Regional Office (AK, ID, OR, and WA)--
WA Regional Office (AK, ID, OR, and WA)--2011 Final Common Crop 
Regulations, Basic Provisions and Various Crop Insurance Provision, 
Crop Insurance Choices for Willamette Valley Oregon Producers, 
Livestock Gross Margin for Dairy Cattle (LGM), Cherry Actual Revenue 
History (ARH), Grape Insurance Program for Western Washington, Adjusted 
Gross Revenue Programs (AGR/AGR-Lite), Dry Pea and Lentil Insurance, 
and Specialty Crops.
    <bullet> Springfield, Illinois Regional Office (IL, IN, MI, and OH) 
Specialty Crops and 2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic 
Provisions and various crop insurance provisions.
    <bullet> St. Paul, Minnesota Regional Office (IA, MN, and WI)--AGR-
Lite, understanding how Revenue Policies function and their 
relationship to marketing decisions, Specialty Crops, and 2011 Final 
Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions and various crop insurance 
provisions.
    <bullet> Topeka, Kansas Regional Office (CO, KS, MO, and NE)--2011 
Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions and various crop 
insurance provisions, Specialty Crops, and Pasture, Rangeland and 
Forage in States and counties with the program.
    <bullet> Valdosta, Georgia Regional Office (AL, FL, GA, SC, and 
Puerto Rico)--2011 Final Common Crop Regulations, Basic Provisions and 
various crop insurance provisions, Specialty Crops and Pasture, 
Rangeland, and Forage/Apiculture in States and counties with the 
program.

II. Award Information

    A. Type of Application: In FY 2010, applications may be submitted 
to the Commodity Partnership for Small Agricultural Risk Management 
Education Small Sessions Program as a new application. All new 
applications will be reviewed competitively using the selection process 
and evaluation criteria described in Section V--Application Review 
Process. Each award will be designated as a Cooperative Agreement, 
which will require substantial involvement by RMA.
    B. Funding Availability: There is no commitment by USDA to fund any 
particular application. Approximately $1.1 million (subject to 
availability of funds) is available in fiscal year 2010 to fund up to 
110 cooperative partnership agreements. The maximum award for any 
agreement will be $10,000. It is anticipated that a minimum of ten 
agreements will be funded in each of the ten designated RMA Regions.
    In the event that all funds available for this program are not 
obligated after the maximum number of agreements are awarded or if 
additional funds become available, these funds may, at the discretion 
of the Manager of FCIC, be used to award additional applications that 
score highly by the technical review panel or allocated pro-rata to 
awardees for use in broadening the size or scope of awarded projects, 
if agreed to by the awardee. In the event that the Manager of FCIC 
determines that available RMA resources cannot support the 
administrative and substantial involvement requirements of all 
agreements recommended for funding, the Manager may elect to fund fewer 
agreements than the available funding might otherwise allow. It is 
expected that the awards will be made approximately 120 days after the 
application deadline. All awards will be made and agreements finalized 
no later than September 30, 2010.
    C. Location and Target Audience: RMA Regional Offices and the 
States serviced within each Region are listed below. Staff from the 
respective RMA Regional Offices will provide substantial involvement 
for projects conducted within the Region.
    Billings, Montana Regional Office: (MT, ND, SD, and WY.)
    Davis, California Regional Office: (AZ, CA, HI, NV, and UT.)
    Jackson, Mississippi Regional Office: (AR, KY, LA, MS, and TN.)
    Oklahoma City, Oklahoma Regional Office: (NM, OK, and TX.)
    Raleigh, North Carolina Regional Office: (CT, DE, MA, MD, ME, NC, 
NH, NJ, NY, PA, RI, VA, VT, and WV.)
    Spokane, Washington Regional Office: (AK, ID, OR, and WA.)
    Springfield, Illinois Regional Office: (IL, IN, MI, and OH.)
    St. Paul, Minnesota Regional Office: (IA, MN, and WI.)
    Topeka, Kansas Regional Office: (CO, KS, MO, and NE.)
    Valdosta, Georgia Regional Office: (AL, FL, GA, SC, and Puerto 
Rico.)
    Applicants must clearly designate the RMA Region where educational 
activities will be conducted in their application narrative in block 12 
of the SF-424 form. Applications without this designation will be 
rejected. Priority will be given to producers of Priority Commodities 
previously identified in this RFA. Applicants proposing to conduct 
educational activities in States served by more than one RMA Regional 
Office (RMA Region) must submit a separate application for each RMA 
Region. Single applications proposing to conduct educational activities 
in States served by more than one RMA Region will be rejected.
    D. Maximum Award: Any application that requests Federal funding of 
more than $10,000 for a project will be rejected. RMA also reserves the 
right to fund successful applications at an amount less than requested 
if it is judged that the application can be implemented at a lower 
funding level.
    E. Project Period: Projects will be funded for a period of up to 
one year from the project starting date.

F. Description of Agreement Award

Awardee Tasks

    In conducting activities to achieve the purpose and goal of this 
program in a designated RMA Region, the awardee will be responsible for 
performing the following tasks:
    <bullet> Develop and conduct a promotional program. This program 
will include activities using media, newsletters, publications, or 
other appropriate informational dissemination techniques that are 
designed to: (a) Raise awareness for risk management; (b) inform 
producers of the availability of risk management tools; and (c) inform 
producers and agribusiness leaders in the designated RMA Region of 
training and informational opportunities.
    <bullet> Deliver risk management training and informational 
opportunities to agricultural producers and agribusiness professionals 
in the designated RMA Region. This will include organizing and 
delivering educational activities using the instructional materials 
assembled by the grantee to meet the local needs of agricultural 
producers. Activities should be directed primarily to agricultural 
producers, but may include those agribusiness professionals that have 
frequent opportunities to advise producers on risk management tools and 
decisions.
    <bullet> Document all educational activities conducted under the 
cooperative partnership agreement and the results of such activities, 
including criteria and indicators used to evaluate the success of the 
program. The awardee will also be required to provide information to 
RMA as requested for evaluation purposes.

G. RMA Activities

    FCIC, working through RMA, will be substantially involved during 
the performance of the funded project through RMA's ten Regional 
Offices. Potential types of substantial involvement may include, but 
are not limited to the following activities.
    <bullet> Collaborate with the awardee in assembling, reviewing, and 
approving

[[Page 8912]]

risk management materials for producers in the designated RMA Region.
    <bullet> Collaborate with the awardee in reviewing and approving a 
promotional program for raising awareness for risk management and for 
informing producers of training and informational opportunities in the 
RMA Region.
    <bullet> Collaborate with the awardee on the delivery of education 
to producers and agribusiness leaders in the RMA Region. This will 
include: (a) Reviewing and approving in advance all producer and 
agribusiness leader educational activities; (b) advising the project 
leader on technical issues related to crop insurance education and 
information; and (c) assisting the project leader in informing crop 
insurance professionals about educational activity plans and scheduled 
meetings.
    <bullet> Conduct an evaluation of the performance of the awardee in 
meeting the deliverables of the project.
    Applications that do not contain substantial involvement by RMA 
will be rejected.

H. Other Tasks

    In addition to the specific, required tasks listed above, the 
applicant may propose additional tasks that would contribute directly 
to the purpose of this program. For any proposed additional task, the 
applicant must identify the objective of the task, the specific 
subtasks required to meet the objective, specific time lines for 
performing the subtasks, and the specific responsibilities of partners. 
The applicant must also identify specific ways in which RMA would have 
substantial involvement in the proposed project task.

III. Eligibility Information

A. Eligible Applicants

    Eligible applicants include State departments of agriculture, 
universities, non-profit agricultural organizations, and other public 
or private organizations with the capacity to lead a local program of 
risk management education for farmers and ranchers in an RMA Region. 
Individuals are not eligible applicants. Although an applicant may be 
eligible to compete for an award based on its status as an eligible 
entity, other factors may exclude an applicant from receiving Federal 
assistance under this program governed by Federal law and regulations 
(e.g. debarment and suspension; a determination of non-performance on a 
prior contract, cooperative agreement, grant or cooperative 
partnership; a determination of a violation of applicable ethical 
standards; a determination of being considered ``high risk''). 
Applications from ineligible or excluded persons will be rejected in 
their entirety.

B. Cost Sharing or Matching

    Although RMA prefers cost sharing by the applicant, this program 
has neither a cost sharing nor a matching requirement.

C. Other--Non-Financial Benefits

    To be eligible, applicants must also be able to demonstrate that 
they will receive a non-financial benefit as a result of a cooperative 
partnership agreement. Non-financial benefits must accrue to the 
applicant and must include more than the ability to provide employment 
income to the applicant or for the applicant's employees or the 
community. The applicant must demonstrate that performance under the 
cooperative partnership agreement will further the specific mission of 
the applicant (such as providing research or activities necessary for 
graduate or other students to complete their educational program). 
Applications that do not demonstrate a non-financial benefit will be 
rejected.

IV. Application and Submission Information

A. Electronic Application Package

    Only electronic applications may be submitted via <a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a> to the 
Risk Management Agency in response to this RFA.
    Prior to preparing an application, it is suggested that the Project 
Director (PD) first contact an Authorized Representative (AR) (also 
referred to as Authorized Organizational Representative or AOR) to 
determine if the organization is prepared to submit electronic 
applications through <a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a>. If the organization is not prepared, 
the AR should see <a href="http://www.grants.gov/applicants/get_registered.jsp">http://www.grants.gov/applicants/get_registered.jsp</a> 
for steps for preparing to submit applications through <a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a>.
    The steps to access application materials are as follows:
    1. In order to access, complete, and submit applications, 
applicants must download and install a version of Adobe Reader 
compatible with <a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a>. This software is essential to apply for RMA 
Federal awards. For basic system requirements and download 
instructions, please see <a href="http://www.grants.gov/help/download_software.jsp">http://www.grants.gov/help/download_software.jsp</a>. To verify that you have a compatible version of Adobe 
Reader, <a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a> established a test package that will assist you in 
making that determination. <a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a> Adobe Versioning Test Package: 
<a href="http://www.grants.gov/applicants/AdobeVersioningTestOnly.jsp">http://www.grants.gov/applicants/AdobeVersioningTestOnly.jsp</a>.
    2. The application package must be obtained via <a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a>, go to 
<a href="http://www.grants.gov">http://www.grants.gov</a>, click on ``Apply for Grants'' in the left-hand 
column, click on ``Step 1: Download a Grant Application Package and 
Instructions,'' enter the funding opportunity number USDA-RMA-RME-SSGP-
002000 in the appropriate box and click ``Download Package.'' From the 
search results, click ``Download'' to access the application package. 
If assistance is needed to access the application package (e.g. 
downloading or navigating Adobe forms), refer to resources available on 
the <a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a> Web site first (http://grants/gov/). <a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a> 
assistance is also available as follows:
    <bullet> <a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a> customer support.
    Toll Free: 1-800-518-4726.
    Business Hours: 24 Hours a day.
    E-mail: <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#a7d4d2d7d7c8d5d3e7c0d5c6c9d3d489c0c8d1"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="cbb8bebbbba4b9bf8bacb9aaa5bfb8e5aca4bd">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>.

B. Content and Form of Application Submission

    A complete and valid application must include the following:
    1. A completed OMB Standard Form 424, ``Application for Federal 
Assistance.''
    2. A completed OMB Standard Form 424-A, ``Budget Information--Non-
construction Programs.'' Federal funding requested (the total of direct 
and indirect costs) must not exceed $10,000.
    3. A completed OMB Standard Form 424-B, ``Assurances, Non-
constructive Programs.''
    4. An Executive Summary (One page) and Proposal Narrative (Not to 
Exceed 10 single-sided pages in Microsoft Word) which will also include 
a Statement of Work.
    5. Budget Narrative (in Microsoft Excel) describing how the 
categorical costs listed on the SF 424-A are derived. The budget 
narrative should provide enough detail for reviewers to easily 
understand how costs were determined and how they relate to the goals 
and objectives of the project.
    6. Partnering Plan to include how each partner will aid in carrying 
out the project goal providing specific tasks. Include Letters of 
commitment from individuals and/or groups, and should include the 
specific tasks they have agreed to do with the applicant.
    7. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form LLL, Disclosure of 
Lobbying Activities.
    8. A completed and signed AD-1049, Certification Regarding Drug-
Free Workplace.

[[Page 8913]]

    a. * 1234. A complete RME-1 Form Risk Management Education Project 
Narrative (RME-1 Form). Complete all required parts.

    * Applications that do not include items 1-8 above will be 
considered incomplete, will not receive further consideration, and 
will be rejected.

    The percent of time devoted to the project for all key project 
personnel must be identified in the application. Applicants must list 
all current public or private support to which personnel identified in 
the application have committed portions of their time, whether or not 
salary support for persons involved is included in the budget 
(supporting agency, amount of award, effective date, expiration date, 
expiration date of award, etc.). An application that duplicates or 
overlaps substantially with an application already reviewed and funded 
(or to be funded) by another organization or agency will not be funded 
under this program. The percentage of time for both ``Current'' and 
``Pending'' projects must not exceed 100% of time committed.
    C. Funding Restrictions: Cooperative partnership agreement funds 
may not be used to:
    a. Plan, repair, rehabilitate, acquire, or construct a building or 
facility including a processing facility;
    b. Purchase, rent, or install fixed equipment;
    c. Repair or maintain privately owned vehicles;
    d. Pay for the preparation of the cooperative partnership agreement 
application;
    e. Fund political activities;
    f. Purchase alcohol, food, beverage or entertainment;
    g. Lend money to support farming or agricultural business operation 
or expansion;
    h. Pay costs incurred prior to receiving a partnership agreement; 
or
    i. Fund any activities prohibited in 7 CFR Parts 3015 and 3019, as 
applicable.

D. Limitation on Use of Project Funds for Salaries and Benefits

    Total costs for salary and benefits allowed for projects under this 
announcement will be limited to not more than 70 percent reimbursement 
of the funds awarded under the cooperative partnership agreement as 
indicated in Section III. Eligibility Information, C. Other--Non-
financial Benefits. One goal of the Commodity Partnerships Small 
Sessions Program is to maximize the use of the limited funding 
available for risk management education for producers of Priority 
Commodities. In order to accomplish this goal, RMA needs to ensure that 
the maximum amount of funds practicable is used for directly providing 
the educational opportunities. Limiting the amount of funding for 
salaries and benefits will allow the limited amount of funding to reach 
the maximum number of farmers and ranchers.

E. Indirect Cost Rates

    a. Indirect costs allowed for projects submitted under this 
announcement will be limited to ten (10) percent of the total direct 
cost of the cooperative partnership agreement. Therefore, when 
preparing budgets, applicants should limit their requests for recovery 
of indirect costs to the lesser of their institution's official 
negotiated indirect cost rate or 10 percent of the total direct costs.
    b. RMA reserves the right to negotiate final budgets with 
successful applicants.
    c. Applicants must provide a copy of their indirect cost rate 
negotiated with their cognizant agency.

F. Other Submission Requirements

    Applicants are responsible for ensuring that RMA receives a 
complete application package by the closing date and time. The agency 
strongly encourages applicants to submit applications well before the 
deadline to allow time for correction of technical errors identified by 
<a href="http://Grants.gov">Grants.gov</a>. Application packages submitted after the deadline will be 
rejected.

G. Acknowledgement of Applications

    Receipt of timely applications will be acknowledged by e-mail, 
whenever possible. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to provide e-
mail addresses in their applications. If an e-mail address is not 
indicated on an application, timely receipt will be acknowledged by 
letter. There will be no notification of incomplete, unqualified or 
unfunded applications until after the awards have been made. When 
received by RMA, applications will be assigned an identification 
number. This number will be communicated to applicants in the 
acknowledgement of receipt of applications. An application's 
identification number should be referenced in all correspondence 
regarding the application. If the applicant does not receive an 
acknowledgement within 15 days of the submission deadline, the 
applicant should notify RMA's point of contact indicated in Section 
VII, Agency Contact.

V. Application Review Information

A. Criteria

    Applications submitted under the Commodity Partnerships Small 
Sessions Program will be evaluated within each RMA Region (area defined 
by States served by the Regional Office) according to the following 
criteria:
Project Impacts--Maximum 20 Points
    The applicant must demonstrate that the project benefits to farmers 
and ranchers warrant the funding requested. Applicants will be scored 
according to the extent they can: (a) Identify the specific actions 
producers will likely be able to take as a result of the educational 
activities described in the Statement of Work; (b) identify the 
specific measures for evaluating results that will be employed in the 
project; (c) reasonably estimate the total number of producers reached 
through the various methods and educational activities described in the 
Statement of Work; and (d) justify such estimates with clear specifics. 
Reviewers' scoring will be based on the scope and reasonableness of the 
applicant's clear descriptions of specific expected actions producers 
will accomplish, and well-designed methods for measuring the project's 
results and effectiveness. Applicants using direct contact methods with 
producers will be scored higher.
Statement of Work--Maximum 20 Points
    The applicant must produce a clear and specific Statement of Work 
for the project. For each of the tasks contained in the Description of 
Agreement Award (refer to Section II Award Information), the applicant 
must identify and describe specific subtasks, responsible entities, 
expected completion dates, RMA substantial involvement, and 
deliverables that will further the purpose of this program. Applicants 
will be scored higher to the extent that the Statement of Work is 
specific, measurable, reasonable, has specific deadlines for the 
completion of subtasks, relates directly to the required activities and 
the program purpose described in this announcement, which is to provide 
producers with training and informational opportunities so that the 
producers will be better able to use financial management, crop 
insurance, marketing contracts, and other existing and emerging risk 
management tools. Applicants are required to submit this Statement of 
Work on Form RME-2 Form. All narratives should give estimates of how 
many producers will be reached through this project. Estimates for non-
producers can also be

[[Page 8914]]

made but they should be separate from the estimate of producers.
Project Management--Maximum 20 Points
    The applicant must demonstrate an ability to implement sound and 
effective project management practices. Higher scores will be awarded 
to applicants that can demonstrate organizational skills, leadership, 
and experience in delivering services or programs that assist 
agricultural producers in the respective RMA Region. The project 
manager must demonstrate that he/she has the capability to accomplish 
the project goal and purpose stated in this announcement by (a) having 
a previous working relationship with the farm community in the 
designated RMA Region of the application, including being able to 
recruit approximately the number of producers to be reached in the 
application and/or (b) having established the capacity to partner with 
and gain the support of grower organizations, agribusiness 
professionals, and agribusiness leaders locally to aid in carrying out 
a program of education and information, including being able to recruit 
approximately the number of producers to be reached in this 
application. Applicants are encouraged to designate an alternate 
Project Leader in the event the Project Leader is unable to finish the 
project. Applicants that will employ, or have access to, personnel who 
have experience in directing local educational programs that benefit 
agricultural producers in the respective RMA Region will receive higher 
rankings.
Budget Appropriateness and Efficiency--Maximum 20 Points
    Applicants must provide a detailed budget summary that clearly 
explains and justifies costs associated with the project. Applicants 
will receive higher scores to the extent that they can demonstrate a 
fair and reasonable use of funds appropriate for the project and a 
budget that contains the estimated cost of reaching each individual 
producer.
Priority Commodity--Maximum 20 Points
    The applicant can submit projects that are not related to Priority 
Commodities. However, priority will be given to projects relating to 
Priority Commodities. Priority will also be given to projects related 
to the Special Emphasis Topics. Projects that relate to Priority 
Commodities and the Special Emphasis Topics will be eligible for the 
most points.

B. Review and Selection Process

    Applications will be evaluated using a two-part process. First, 
each application will be screened by RMA personnel to ensure that it 
meets the requirements in this announcement. Applications that do not 
meet the requirements of this announcement or that are incomplete will 
not receive further consideration during the next process. Applications 
that meet announcement requirements will be sorted into the RMA Region 
in which the applicant proposes to conduct the project and will be 
presented to a review panel for consideration.
    Second, the review panel will meet to consider and discuss the 
merits of each application. The panel will consist of not less than 
three independent reviewers. Reviewers will be drawn from USDA, other 
Federal agencies, and public and private organizations, as needed. 
After considering the merits of all applications within an RMA Region, 
panel members will score each application according to the criteria and 
point values listed above. The panel will then rank each application 
against others within the RMA Region according to the scores received. 
A lottery will be used to resolve any instances of a tie score that 
might have a bearing on funding recommendations. If such a lottery is 
required, the names of all tied applicants will be entered into a 
drawing. The first tied applicant drawn will have priority over other 
tied applicants for funding consideration.
    The review panel will report the results of the evaluation to the 
Manager of FCIC. The panel's report will include the recommended 
applicants to receive cooperative partnership agreements for each RMA 
Region. Funding will not be provided for an application receiving a 
score less than 45. Funding will not be provided for an application 
that is highly similar to a higher-scoring application in the same RMA 
Region. Highly similar is one that proposes to reach the same producers 
likely to be reached by another applicant that scored higher by the 
panel and the same general educational material is proposed to be 
delivered.
    An organization, or group of organizations in partnership, may 
apply for funding under other FCIC or RMA programs, in addition to the 
program described in this announcement. However, if the Manager of FCIC 
determines that an application recommended for funding is sufficiently 
similar to a project that has been funded or has been recommended to be 
funded under another RMA or FCIC program, then the Manager may elect 
not to fund that application in whole or in part. The Manager of FCIC 
will make the final determination on those applications that will be 
awarded funding.

VI. Award Administration Information

A. Award Notices

    The award document will provide pertinent instructions and 
information including, at a minimum, the following:
    (1) Legal name and address of performing organization or 
institution to whom the Director has issued an award under the terms of 
this request for applications;
    (2) Title of project;
    (3) Name(s) and institution(s) of PDs chosen to direct and control 
approved activities;
    (4) Identifying award number assigned by the Department;
    (5) Project period, specifying the amount of time the Department 
intends to support the project without requiring recompeting for funds;
    (6) Total amount of Departmental financial assistance approved by 
the Director during the project period;
    (7) Legal authority(ies) under which the award is issued;
    (8) Appropriate Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) 
number;
    (9) Applicable award terms and conditions (see <a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov/business/awards/awardterms.htm">http://www.rma.usda.gov/business/awards/awardterms.htm</a>l to view RMA award 
terms and conditions);
    (10) Approved budget plan for categorizing allocable project funds 
to accomplish the stated purpose of the award; and
    (11) Other information or provisions deemed necessary by RMA to 
carry out its respective awarding activities or to accomplish the 
purpose of a particular award.
    Following approval by the awarding official of RMA of the 
applications to be selected for funding, project leaders whose 
applications have been selected for funding will be notified. Within 
the limit of funds available for such a purpose, the awarding official 
of RMA shall enter into cooperative partnership agreements with those 
selected applicants.
    After a cooperative agreement has been signed, RMA will extend to 
awardees, in writing, the authority to draw down funds for the purpose 
of conducting the activities listed in the agreement. All funds 
provided to the applicant by FCIC must be expended solely for the 
purpose for which the funds are obligated in accordance with the 
approved agreement and budget, the regulations, the terms and 
conditions of the award, and the applicability of

[[Page 8915]]

Federal cost principles. No commitment of Federal assistance beyond the 
project period is made or implied for any award resulting from this 
notice.
    Notification of denial of funding will be sent to applicants after 
final funding decisions have been made and the awardees announced 
publicly. Reasons for denial of funding can include, but are not 
limited to, incomplete applications, applications with evaluation 
scores that are lower that other applications in an RMA Region, or 
applications that are highly similar to a higher-scoring application in 
the same RMA Region. Highly similar is an application that proposes to 
reach the same producers likely to be reached by another applicant that 
scored higher by the panel and the same general educational material is 
proposed to be delivered.

B. Administrative and National Policy Requirements

1. Requirement To Use Program Logo
    Applicants awarded cooperative partnership agreements will be 
required to use a program logo and design provided by RMA for all 
instructional and promotional materials, when deemed appropriate.
2. Requirement To Provide Project Information to an RMA-Selected 
Representative
    Applicants awarded cooperative partnership agreements may be 
required to assist RMA in evaluating the effectiveness of its 
educational programs by providing documentation of educational 
activities and related information to any representative selected by 
RMA for program evaluation purposes.
3. Private Crop Insurance Organizations and Potential Conflicts of 
Interest
    Private organizations that are involved in the sale of Federal crop 
insurance, or that have financial ties to such organizations, are 
eligible to apply for funding under this announcement. However, such 
entities will not be allowed to receive funding to conduct activities 
that would otherwise be required under a Standard Reinsurance Agreement 
or any other agreement in effect between FCIC and the entity. Also, 
such entities will not be allowed to receive funding to conduct 
activities that could be perceived by producers as promoting one 
company's services or products over another's. If applying for funding, 
such organizations are encouraged to be sensitive to potential 
conflicts of interest and to describe in their application the specific 
actions they will take to avoid actual and perceived conflicts of 
interest.
4. Access to Panel Review Information
    Upon written request from the applicant, scores from the evaluation 
panel, not including the identity of reviewers, will be sent to the 
applicant after the review and awards process has been completed.
5. Confidential Aspects of Applications and Awards
    The names of applicants, the names of individuals identified in the 
applications, the content of applications, and the panel evaluations of 
applications will all be kept confidential, except to those involved in 
the review process, to the extent permitted by law. In addition, the 
identities of review panel members will remain confidential throughout 
the entire review process and will not be released to applicants. At 
the end of the fiscal year, names of panel members will be made 
available. However, panelists will not be identified with the review of 
any particular application. When an application results in a 
partnership agreement, that agreement becomes a part of the official 
record of RMA transactions, available to the public upon specific 
request. Information that the Secretary of Agriculture determines to be 
of a confidential, privileged, or proprietary nature will be held in 
confidence to the extent permitted by law. Therefore, any information 
that the applicant wishes to be considered confidential, privileged, or 
proprietary should be clearly marked within an application, including 
the basis for such designation. The original copy of an application 
that does not result in an award will be retained by RMA for a period 
of one year. Other copies will be destroyed. Copies of applications not 
receiving awards will be released only with the express written consent 
of the applicant or to the extent required by law. An application may 
be withdrawn at any time prior to award.
6. Audit Requirements
    Applicants awarded cooperative partnership agreements are subject 
to audit.
7. Prohibitions and Requirements With Regard to Lobbying
    Section 1352 of Public Law 101-121, enacted on October 23, 1989, 
imposes prohibitions and requirements for disclosure and certification 
related to lobbying on awardees of Federal contracts, grants, 
cooperative agreements, and loans. It provides exemptions for Indian 
Tribes and Tribal organizations. Current and prospective awardees, and 
any subcontractors, are prohibited from using Federal funds, other than 
profits from a Federal contract, for lobbying Congress or any Federal 
agency in connection with the award of a contract, grant, cooperative 
agreement, or loan. In addition, for each award action in excess of 
$100,000 ($150,000 for loans) the law requires awardees and any 
subcontractors: (1) To certify that they have neither used nor will use 
any appropriated funds for payment of lobbyists; (2) to disclose the 
name, address, payment details, and purpose of any agreements with 
lobbyists whom awardees of their subcontractors will pay with profits 
or other non-appropriated funds on or after December 22, 1989; and (3) 
to file quarterly up-dates about the use of lobbyists if material 
changes occur in their use. The law establishes civil penalties for 
non-compliance. A copy of the certification and disclosure forms must 
be submitted with the application, are available at the address, and 
telephone number listed in Section VII. Agency Contact.
8. Applicable OMB Circulars
    All partnership agreements funded as a result of this notice will 
be subject to the requirements contained in all applicable OMB 
circulars.
9. Requirement To Assure Compliance With Federal Civil Rights Laws
    Awardees of all cooperative partnership agreements funded as a 
result of this notice are required to know and abide by Federal civil 
rights laws and to assure USDA and RMA that the awardee is in 
compliance with and will continue to comply with Title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), 7 CFR Part 15, and USDA 
regulations promulgated thereunder, 7 CFR 1901.202. RMA requires 
awardees to submit an Assurance Agreement (Civil Rights), assuring RMA 
of this compliance prior to the beginning of the project period.
10. Requirement To Participate in a Post Award Teleconference
    RMA requires that project leaders participate in a post award 
teleconference, if conducted to become fully aware of agreement 
requirements and for delineating the roles of RMA personnel and the 
procedures that will be followed in administering the agreement and 
will afford an opportunity for the orderly transition of agreement 
duties and obligations if different personnel are to assume post-award 
responsibility.

[[Page 8916]]

11. Requirement To Submit Educational Materials to the National AgRisk 
Education Library
    RMA requires that project leaders upload digital copies of all risk 
management educational materials developed because of the project to 
the National AgRisk Education Library (<a href="http://www.agrisk.umn.edu/">http://www.agrisk.umn.edu/</a>) for 
posting, if electronically reporting. RMA will be clearly identified as 
having provided funding for the materials.
12. Requirement To Submit Proposed Results to the National AgRisk 
Education Library
    RMA requires that project leaders submit results of the project to 
the National AgRisk Education Library (<a href="http://www.agrisk.umn.edu/">http://www.agrisk.umn.edu/</a>) for 
posting if electronically reporting.
13. Requirement To Submit a Project Plan of Operation in the Event of a 
Human Pandemic Outbreak
    RMA requires that project leaders submit a project plan of 
operation in case of a human pandemic event. The plan should address 
the concept of continuing operations as they relate to the project. 
This should include the roles, responsibilities, and contact 
information for the project team and individuals serving as back-ups in 
case of a pandemic outbreak.

C. Reporting Requirements

    Awardees will be required to submit quarterly progress reports 
using the Performance Progress Report (SF-PPR) as the cover sheet, 
quarterly financial reports (OMB Standard Form 425), and quarterly 
Activity Logs (Form RMA-300) throughout the project period, as well as 
a final program and financial report not later than 90 days after the 
end of the project period. The quarterly progress reports, Activity 
Logs, and final program reports MUST be submitted through the Results 
Verification System. The Web site address is <a href="http://www.agrisk.umn.edu/RMA/Reporting">http://www.agrisk.umn.edu/RMA/Reporting</a>.
    Awardees will be required to submit prior to the award:
    <bullet> A completed and signed Assurance Agreement (Civil Rights).
    <bullet> A completed and signed Faith-Based Survey on EEO.

VII. Agency Contact

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Applicants and other interested 
parties are encouraged to contact: Leonard Randolph, Sundii Johnson-
Phillips, or Lydia M. Astorga, USDA-RMA-RME, phone: 202-720-0779, e-
mail: <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#d2809f93fc80bba1b9ff97b692a0bfb3fca7a1b6b3fcb5bda4"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="47150a0669152e342c6a022307352a26693234232669202831">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>. You may also obtain information 
regarding this announcement from the RMA Web site at: <a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov/aboutrma/agreements">http://www.rma.usda.gov/aboutrma/agreements</a>.

VIII. Other Information

A. Dun and Bradstreet Data Universal Numbering System (DUNS)

    A DUNS number is a unique nine-digit sequence recognized as the 
universal standard for identifying and keeping track of over 70 million 
businesses worldwide. The Office of Management and Budget published a 
notice of final policy issuance in the Federal Register June 27, 2003 
(68 FR 38402) that requires a DUNS number in every application (i.e., 
hard copy and electronic) for a grant or cooperative agreement on or 
after October 1, 2003. Therefore, potential applicants should verify 
that they have a DUNS number or take the steps needed to obtain one. 
For information about how to obtain a DUNS number, go to <a href="http://www.grants.gov">http://www.grants.gov</a>. Please note that the registration may take up to 14 
business days to complete.

B. Required Registration With the Central Contract Registry (CCR) for 
Submission of Proposals

    The Central Contract Registry (CCR) is a database that serves as 
the primary Government repository for contractor information required 
for the conduct of business with the Government. This database will 
also be used as a central location for maintaining organizational 
information for organizations seeking and receiving grants from the 
Government. Such organizations must register in the CCR prior to the 
submission of applications. A DUNS number is needed for CCR 
registration. For information about how to register in the CCR, visit 
``Get Registered'' at the Web site, <a href="http://www.grants.gov">http://www.grants.gov</a>. Allow a 
minimum of 5 business days to complete the CCR registration.

C. Related Programs

    Funding availability for this program may be announced at 
approximately the same time as funding availability for similar but 
separate programs--CFDA No. 10.455 (Community Outreach and Assistance 
Partnerships), and CFDA No. 10.458 (Crop Insurance Education in 
Targeted States). These programs have some similarities, but also key 
differences. The differences stem from important features of each 
program's authorizing legislation and different RMA objectives. 
Prospective applicants should carefully examine and compare the notices 
for each program.

    Signed in Washington, DC on February 23, 2010.
William J. Murphy,
Manager, Federal Crop Insurance Corporation.
[FR Doc. 2010-3975 Filed 2-25-10; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3410-08-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>