<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 68 Issue 80 (Friday, April 25, 2003)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 68, Number 80 (Friday, April 25, 2003)]
[Notices]
[Pages 20363-20366]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 03-10223]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE


Submission for OMB Review; Comment Request

April 21, 2003.
    The Department of Agriculture has submitted the following 
information collection requirement(s) to OMB for review and clearance 
under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, Public Law 104-13. Comments 
regarding (a) whether the collection of information is necessary for 
the proper performance of the functions of the agency, including 
whether the information will have practical utility; (b) the accuracy 
of the agency's estimate of burden including the validity of the 
methodology and assumptions used; (c) ways to enhance the quality, 
utility and clarity of the information to be collected; (d) ways to 
minimize the burden of the collection of information on those who are 
to respond, including through the use of appropriate automated, 
electronic, mechanical, or other technological collection techniques or 
other forms of information technology should be addressed to: Desk 
Officer for Agriculture, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Washington, DC 20503 and to 
Departmental Clearance Office, USDA, OCIO, Mail Stop 7602, Washington, 
DC 20250-7602. Comments regarding these information collections are 
best assured of having their full effect if received within 30 days of 
this notification. Copies of the submission(s) may be obtained by 
calling (202) 720-8681.
    An agency may not conduct or sponsor a collection of information 
unless the collection of information displays a currently valid OMB 
control number and the agency informs potential persons who are to 
respond to the collection of information that such persons are not 
required to respond to the collection of information unless it displays 
a currently valid OMB control number.

Rural Business-Cooperative Service

    Title: National Rural Development Partnership.
    OMB Control Number: 0570-0043.
    Summary of Collection: The Farm Security and Rural Investment Act 
of 2002 authorized the Secretary of the Department of Agriculture to 
continue the National Rural Development Partnership (NRDP). The 
objective of the National Rural Development Partnership is to 
facilitate the establishment and recognition of one State Rural 
Development Council (SRDCs) per state. The statue requires that 
membership of the SRDC is responsible for the governance and operations 
of the SRDC and that the applicant has matching funds available, or in-
kind goods and services to support the activities of the SRDC. SRDCs 
are members of the NRDP.
    Need and Use of the Information: The information collected is used 
to confirm that an applicant meet the eligibility requirements. The 
following items: Description of Council, copies of organizational 
documents and rules of governance, membership list, policy statement 
regarding operations, summary profile of state, and evidence of 
matching funds are required in the application package and is necessary 
for USDA to verify eligibility. Without this information, USDA cannot 
assure that new or existing SRDCs meet the statutory requirements for 
eligibility.
    Description of Respondents: Not-for-profit institutions; Business 
or other for-profit; Farms; Individuals or households; Federal 
Government; State, Local or Tribal Government.
    Number of Respondents: 50.
    Frequency of Responses: Reporting: Annually.
    Total Burden Hours: 300.

Rural Utility Service

    Title: 7 CFR part 1755, Telecommunications Standards and 
Specifications.
    OMB Control Number: 0572-NEW.
    Summary of Collection: 7 CFR part 1755 establishes Agency policy 
that materials and equipment purchased by Rural Utility Service (RUS) 
telecommunications borrowers or accepted as contractor-furnished 
material must conform to RUS standards and specifications where they 
have been established and, if included in RUS IP 344-02, ``List of 
Materials Acceptable for Use on Telecommunications System of RUS 
Borrowers'', must be selected from that list or must have received 
technical acceptance from RUS. To protect the security of loans it 
makes and to ensure that the telecommunications services provided to 
rural Americans are comparable to those offered in urban and suburban 
areas, RUS establishes the minimum acceptable performance criteria for 
materials and equipment to be employed on telecommunications system 
financed by RUS. Manufacturers wishing to sell their products to RUS 
borrowers, request RUS' consideration for acceptance of their products 
and submit data demonstrating their products' compliance with RUS 
specification.
    Need and Use of the Information: RUS will evaluate the data to 
determine that the quality of the products is acceptable and that their 
use will not jeopardize loan security. The information is closely 
reviewed to be certain that test data, product dimensions and product 
material compositions fully comply with RUS technical standards and 
specifications

[[Page 20364]]

that have been established for the particular product.
    Description of the Respondents: Business or other for-profit; Not-
for-profit institutions.
    Number of Respondents: 60.
    Frequency of Responses: Reporting: On occasion.
    Total Burden Hours: 2020.

Forest Service

    Title: Urgent Removal of Timber.
    OMB Control Number: 0596-0167.
    Summary of Collection: Periodically, catastrophic events such as 
severe drought conditions, insect and disease outbreaks, wildfires, 
floods, and wind throw occur on forested lands within, or near, 
National Forest System lands. As a result of such catastrophic events, 
substantial amounts of private and other public timber may be severely 
damaged. The damaged timber must be harvested within a relatively short 
time period to avoid substantial losses in both the quantity and 
quality of the timber due to deterioration. The critical time period 
available for harvesting this damaged timber and avoiding substantial 
deterioration varies with the season of the year, the species of 
timber, the damaging agent, and the location of the damaged timber. The 
National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16 U.S.C. 472a) provides that 
timber sale contracts with an original term of 2 years or more may not 
be extended unless there is a finding that substantial overriding 
public interest justifies an extension.
    Need and Use of the Information: The Forest Service (FS) will 
collect information to verify that: (a) A specific catastrophe occurred 
and identifies the particular geographic area which was affected for 
which urgent removal extensions may be granted; (b) there is a high 
risk that substantial timber quantities or values of the damaged non-
National Forest System timber in the affected geographic area would 
deteriorate unless urgently removed; (c) the manufacturing facilities 
and/or logging equipment capacity available to purchasers are 
insufficient to provide for both the rapid harvest of damaged non-
National Forest System timber in need of urgent removal and the 
continued harvest of undamaged National Forest System timber under 
contract with the FS; (d) failure to harvest the damaged non-National 
Forest System timber promptly may result in significant public or 
private resource loss, pose a threat to public safety, or create a 
threat of an insect and/or disease epidemic to National Forest System, 
other public, or private lands or resources.
    Description of Respondents: Business or other for-profit; 
Individuals or households; Federal Government; State, Local or Tribal 
Government.
    Number of Respondents: 25.
    Frequency of Responses: Reporting: On occasion.
    Total Burden Hours: 50.

Rural Business Service

    Title: 7 CFR 4287-B, ``Servicing Business and Industry Guaranteed 
Loans.
    OMB Control Number: 0570-0016.
    Summary of Collection: The Business and Industry (B&I) program was 
legislated in 1972 under section 310B of the Consolidated Farm and 
Rural Development Act, as amended (the Act). The purpose of the B&I 
program, as authorized by the Act, is to improve economic and 
environmental climate in rural communities, including pollution 
abatement and control. This purpose is achieved through bolstering the 
existing private credit structure through the guaranteeing of quality 
loans, which will provide lasting community benefits. The B&I program 
is administered by the Rural Business Service (RBS) through Rural 
Development State and sub-State offices serving each State. RBS will 
collect information using various forms from the lender and the 
borrower. This information is vital for making prudent financial 
decisions.
    Need and Use of the Information: RBS will collect information to 
monitor the guaranteed loan portfolio to ensure that the lenders are 
adequately servicing the loans. RBS through its respective Business 
Programs Divisions in Washington, DC and its 47 State Offices 
throughout the United States will be the primary users of the 
information collected. If the information is not collected, RBS would 
not be able to make prudent credit decisions nor would the Agency be 
able to effectively monitor the lender's servicing activities and thus 
minimize losses under the program.
    Description of Respondents: Business or other for-profit; State, 
Local or Tribal Government.
    Number of Respondents: 12,430.
    Frequency of Responses: Reporting: On occasion; Quarterly; 
Annually.
    Total Burden Hours: 16,860.

Rural Business Service

    Title: 7 CFR 4279-B, Guaranteed Loan Making--Business and Industry 
Loans.
    OMB Control Number: 0570-0017.
    Summary of Collection: The Business and Industry (B&I) program was 
legislated in 1972 under section 310B of the Consolidated Farm and 
Rural Development Act, as amended. The purpose of the program is to 
improve, develop, or finance businesses, industries, and employment and 
improve the economic and environmental climate in rural communities. 
This purpose is achieved through bolstering the existing private credit 
structure through the guaranteeing of quality loans made by lending 
institutions, thereby providing lasting community benefits. The B&I 
program is administered by the Rural Business Service (RBS) through 
Rural Development State and sub-State offices serving each State.
    Need and Use of the Information: RBS will collect information to 
determine a lender and borrower eligibility and creditworthiness. The 
information is used by RBS loan officers and approval officials to 
determine program eligibility and for program monitoring.
    Description of Respondents: Business or other for-profit; State, 
Local or Tribal Government; Farms; Not-for-profit institutions.
    Number of Respondents: 8,544.
    Frequency of Responses: Reporting: On occasion.
    Total Burden Hours: 20,561.

Rural Business Service (RBS)

    Title: 7 CFR 4279-A, Guaranteed Loanmaking General.
    OMB Control Number: 0570-0018.
    Summary of Collection: The Business and Industry (B&I) program was 
legislated in 1972 under Section 310B of the Consolidated Farm and 
Rural Development Act, as amended. The purpose of the program is to 
improve, develop, or finance businesses, industries, and employment and 
improve the economic and environmental climate in rural communities. 
This purpose is achieved through bolstering the existing private credit 
structure through the guaranteeing of quality loans made by lending 
institutions, thereby providing lasting community benefits. The B&I 
program is administered by the RBS through Rural Development State and 
sub-State offices serving each state.
    Need and Use of the Information: RBS will collect information to 
determine eligibility and credit worthiness for a lender or borrower. 
The information is used by Agency loan officers and approval officials 
to determine lender program eligibility and for program monitoring.
    Description of Respondents: Business or other for-profit; State, 
Local or Tribal Government; Farms; Not-for-profit institutions.
    Number of Respondents: 1,037.

[[Page 20365]]

    Frequency of Responses: Reporting: On occasion.
    Total Burden Hours: 1,494.

Rural Utilities Service

    Title: Financial and Statistical Report for Telephone Borrowers.
    OMB Control Number: 0572-0031.
    Summary of Collection: The Rural Utilities Service's (RUS) is a 
credit agency of the Department of Agriculture. The department makes 
mortgage loans and loan guarantees to finance electric, 
telecommunications and water and waste facilities in rural areas. In 
addition to providing loans and loan guarantees, one of RUS' main 
objectives is to safeguard loan security until the loan is repaid. The 
RE Act (7 U.S.C. 901 et seq) authorizes the Administrator to make loans 
for the purpose of providing telephone service to the widest 
practicable number of rural subscribes. The RE Act also authorizes the 
Administrator to make studies, investigations, and reports concerning 
the progress of borrowers' furnishing of adequate telephone service and 
publish and disseminate this information.
    Need and Use of the Information: RUS will use Form 479, ``Financial 
and Statistical Report for Telephone Borrowers''. This form provides 
RUS with (1) vital financial information needed to ensure the 
maintenance and security of the Government's loans, and (2) statistical 
data that enables RUS to ensure the provision of quality telephone 
service as mandated by the Rural Electrification Act of 1936, as 
amended (RE Act). In addition, RUS will collect information on toll 
revenues of telephone systems, loan feasibility to assure the loan can 
be repaid and use this data to compile the agency's Annual Statistical 
Report. These functions are essential to protect loan security and to 
achieve the objectives of the RE Act.
    Description of Respondents: Business or other for-profit; Not-for-
profit institutions.
    Number of Respondents: 725.
    Frequency of Responses: Reporting: Annually.
    Total Burden Hours: 2,900.

Rural Utilities Service

    Title: RUS Specification for quality control and Inspection of 
Timber Products.
    OMB Control Number: 0572-0036.
    Summary of Collection: The Rural Utilities Service (RUS) is a 
credit agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). It makes 
mortgage loans and loan guarantees to finance electric, 
telecommunications, and water and waste facilities in rural areas. Loan 
programs are managed in accordance with the Rural Electrification Act 
(RE Act) of 1936, 7 U.S.C. 901 et seq., as amended.
    Need and Use of the Information: RUS will use the information in 
verifying acceptability of poles and crossarms purchased by RUS 
borrowers. Each year, RUS borrowers are required to submit an Annual 
Summary of Purchases that provides a list of plants from which it 
obtained poles or crossarms during the preceding calendar year and 
Treaters must provide notification that they will treat poles for the 
upcoming year. Test reports are needed so that the purchaser, the 
inspectors, and RUS will be able to spot-check the general accuracy of 
the tests.
    Description of the Respondents: Business or other for-profit; Not-
for-profit institutions.
    Number of Respondents: 700.
    Frequency of Responses: Reporting: On occasion.
    Total Burden Hours: 40,763.

Rural Utilities Service

    Title: 7 CFR 1744-E, Borrower Investments--Telecommunications Loan 
Program.
    OMB Control Number: 0572-0098.
    Summary of Collection: The Rural Economic Development Act of 1990, 
Title XXIII of the Farm Bill, Pub. L. 101-624, authorized qualified 
Rural Utilities Service (RUS) borrowers to make investments in rural 
development projects without the prior approval of the RUS 
Administrator, provided, however that such investments do not cause the 
borrower to exceed its allowable qualified investment level as 
determined in accordance with the procedures set forth in 7 CFR part 
1744, Subpart E. RUS requests that the borrower submit (1) a 
description of the rural development project and type of investment; 
(2) a reasonable estimate of the amount the borrower is committed to 
provide to the project including future expenditures; and (3) a pro 
forma balance sheet and cash flow statement for the period covering the 
borrower's future commitments to determine that the ``excess'' or 
proposed ``excess'' investments will not impair the borrower's ability 
to repay the loan or cause financial hardship.
    Need and Use of the Information: RUS will collect information to 
consider whether or not to approve a borrower's request to make an 
investment in a rural development project when such an investment would 
cause the borrower to exceed its allowable investment level. If this 
information was not collected, RUS could not thoroughly assess the 
economic impact of such an investment.
    Description of Respondents: Business or other for-profit; Not-for-
profit institutions.
    Number of Respondents: 25.
    Frequency of Responses: Reporting: On occasion.
    Total Burden Hours: 238.

Rural Housing Service

    Title: 7 CFR 1944-I, ``Self-Help Technical Assistance Grants''.
    OMB Control Number: 0575-0043.
    Summary of Collection: This regulation prescribes policies and 
responsibilities, including the collection and use of information, 
necessary to administer the Section 523 Mutual and Self-Help housing 
(MSH) program. The MSH program affords low-income families the 
opportunity for home ownership by providing funds to non-profit 
organizations for supervisory and technical assistance to the 
homebuilding families. Rural Housing Service (RHS) will collect 
information from non-profit organizations that want to develop a Self-
Help program in their area to increase the availability of affordable 
housing. The information is collected at the local, district and state 
levels. The information requested by RHS includes financial and 
organizational information about the non-profit organization.
    Need and Use of the Information: RHS needs this information to 
determine if the organization is capable of successfully carrying out 
the requirements of the Self-Help program. The information is collected 
on an as requested or needed basis. RHS has reviewed the program's need 
for the collection of information versus the burden placed on the 
public.
    Description of Respondents: State, Local or Tribal Government; Not-
for-profit institutions.
    Number of Respondents: 160.
    Frequency of Responses: Recordkeeping; Reporting: Monthly, 
Annually.
    Total Burden Hours: 4,372.

Rural Housing Service

    Title: 7 CFR 1951-E, ``Servicing of Community and Direct Business 
Programs Loans and Grants''.
    OMB Control Number: 0575-0066.
    Summary of Collection: Rural Development (including Farm Credit 
Programs of the Farm Service Agency), hereinafter referred to as 
Agency, is the credit agency for agricultural and rural development for 
the Department of Agriculture. The Agency offers supervised credit to 
build and operate family farms, modest housing, water

[[Page 20366]]

and sewer systems, essential community facilities, and business and 
industrial operations in rural areas. Section 331 and 335 of the 
Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act, as amended, authorize the 
Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Agency, to establish 
provisions for security servicing policies for the loans and grants in 
questions. If there is a problem which exists, a recipient of the loan, 
grant, or loan guarantee must furnish financial information which is 
used to aid in resolving the problem through reamortization, sale, 
transfer, debt restructuring, liquidation, or other means provided in 
the regulations.
    Need and Use of the Information: RHS will collect information to 
determine applicant/borrower eligibility and project feasibility for 
various servicing actions. The information enables field staff to 
ensure that borrowers operate on a sound basis and use loan and grant 
funds for authorized purposes.
    Description of Respondents: State, Local or Tribal Government; Not-
for-profit institutions.
    Number of Respondents: 275.
    Frequency of Responses: Reporting: On occasion.
    Total Burden Hours: 932.

Agricultural Marketing Service

    Title: Application for Plant Variety Protection Certificate and 
Objective Description of Variety.
    OMB Control Number: 0581-0055.
    Summary of Collection: The Plant Variety Protection Act (PVPA, was 
approved December 24, 1970; 84 Stat. 1542, 7 U.S.C. 2321 et seq.) was 
established to encourage the development of novel varieties of 
sexually-reproduced plants and make them available to the public, 
providing intellectual property rights (IPR) protection to those who 
breed, develop, or discover such novel varieties, and thereby promote 
progress in agriculture in the public interest. The PVPA is a voluntary 
user funded program that grants intellectual property ownership rights 
to breeders of new and novel seed- and tuber-reproduced plant 
varieties. To obtain these rights the applicant must provide 
information that shows the variety is eligible for protection and that 
it is indeed new, distinct, uniform, and stable, as the law requires. 
Applicants are provided with applications to identify the information 
that is required to issue a certificate of protection.
    Need and Use of the Information: AMS will collect information from 
the applicant to determine if the variety is eligible for protection 
under the PVPA. If this information is not collected, applicants would 
not be able to obtain the protection that the PVPA is intended to 
provide.
    Description of Respondents: Business or other for-profit; Not-for-
profit institutions; Federal Government.
    Number of Respondents: 129.
    Frequency of Responses: Reporting: On occasion.
    Total Burden Hours: 1,283.

Forest Service

    Title: Forest Land Enhancement Program.
    OMB Control Number: 0596-NEW.
    Summary of Collection: The Forest Land Enhancement Program (FLEP) 
is authorized in the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 
(Public Law 107-711) through an amendment to the Cooperative Forestry 
Assistance Act (16 U.S.C. 2103). The goals of FLEP are to: (1) Enhance 
the productivity of timber, fish and wildlife habitat, soil and water 
quality, wetland, recreational resources and aesthetic values of 
private non-industrial private forestland; and (2) establish, manage, 
maintain, enhance, and restore such forests. The act requires 
establishing a grants program to achieve sustainable forestry; assist 
owners of non-industrial private forestlands to more actively manage 
these lands and related resources; and encourage such owners to use 
State, Federal, and private sector resource management expertise, 
financial assistance and educational programs. Through FLEP, States can 
cost-share up to 75% to implement eligible forest management practices 
on non-industrial private forest ownerships. In order to be eligible 
for cost-share, landowners must have a forest management plan that has 
been approved by their State forester.
    Need and Use of the Information: The Forest Service (FS) will 
collect information to describe how the program will be implemented in 
each State. The plans must (1) describe how the State will allocate 
FLEP funding among the four major categories of administration, 
resource management expertise, education, and financial assistance; (2) 
describe how cost-share funds shall be made available to eligible 
participants; (3) describe ownership and acreage limitations; (4) 
define what constitutes a forest management plan; (5) identify 
landowner payment limitations; (6) identify eligible cost-share 
practices; (7) describe how funds may be distributed to participants; 
and (8) describe program application and reimbursement processes. If 
these information collection requirements were not implemented, it 
would be virtually impossible to provide proper Federal oversight for 
the new program.
    Description of Respondents: State, Local or Tribal Government; 
Individuals or households; Farms.
    Number of Respondents: 8,418.
    Frequency of Responses: Recordkeeping; Reporting: Semi-annually; 
Annually.
    Total Burden Hours: 54,747.

Sondra A. Blakey,
Departmental Information Collection Clearance Officer.
[FR Doc. 03-10223 Filed 4-24-03; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3410-01-P


</pre></body>
</html>