<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 69 Issue 100 (Monday, May 24, 2004)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 69, Number 100 (Monday, May 24, 2004)]
[Notices]
[Pages 29503-29508]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 04-11615]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Federal Crop Insurance Corporation


Request for Applications (RFA): Research and Development Risk 
Management Research Partnerships

    Announcement Type: Announcement of availability of funds and 
request for application for risk management research partnerships.
    Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number (CFDA): 10.456.

DATES: The closing date and time for receipt of an application is 5 
p.m. c.d.t. on July 8, 2004. Applications received after the deadline 
will not be evaluated by the technical review panel and will not be 
considered for funding. All awards will be made and agreements 
completed no later than September 30, 2004.
    Overview: The purpose of the Risk Management Research Partnerships 
is to fund the development of non-insurance risk management tools that 
will be utilized by agricultural producers to assist them in mitigating 
the risks inherent in agricultural production. The proposals must 
address at least one of the seven objectives listed in part I.D. 
Approximately $4 million is available to fund an undetermined number of 
partnerships. Applications are accepted from public and private 
entities; individuals are not eligible to apply. No cost sharing by the 
applicant is required. There are no limitations on the number of 
applications each applicant may submit.

I. Funding Opportunity Description

A. Background

    RMA is committed to meeting the risk management needs and improving 
or developing risk management tools for the nation's farmers and 
ranchers. It does this by offering Federal crop insurance and other 
risk management products and tools through a network of private-sector 
entities and by overseeing the creation of new products, seeking 
enhancements in existing products, and by expanding the use of a 
variety of risk management tools. Risk management tools include a 
variety of risk management options and strategies developed to assist 
producers in mitigating the risks inherent in agricultural production. 
Risk

[[Page 29504]]

management tools may include: Financial management tools to mitigate 
price and production risks; tools to enhance measurement and prediction 
of risks in order to facilitate risk diversification; tools to improve 
production management, harvesting, record keeping or marketing. For the 
purposes of this announcement, risk management tools do not include 
insurance products, plans of insurance, policies, modifications thereof 
or any related material.

B. Purpose

    The purpose of this program is to fund partnership agreements that 
assist producers, minimize their production risks, and/or develop risk 
management tools. The agreements are for the development of risk 
management tools for use directly by agricultural producers. To aid in 
meeting these goals each partnership agreement awarded through this 
program will provide the recipient with funds, guidance, and the 
substantial involvement of RMA to carry out these risk management 
initiatives. Applications requesting funding for the development of 
insurance products, plans of insurance, policies, modifications thereof 
or related materials are excluded from consideration under this 
announcement.

C. Authorization

    In accordance with section 522(d) of the Federal Crop Insurance Act 
(Act), the Federal Crop Insurance Corporation (FCIC) announces the 
availability of funding for risk management research activities. 
Priority will be given to those activities addressing the need for risk 
management tools for producers of the following agricultural 
commodities (For purposes of this announcement, these commodities are 
collectively referred to as ``Priority Commodities''):
    <bullet> Agricultural commodities covered by (7 U.S.C. 7333). 
Commodities in this group are commercial crops that are not covered by 
catastrophic risk protection crop insurance, are used for food or fiber 
(except livestock), and specifically include, but are not limited to, 
floricultural, ornamental nursery, Christmas trees, turf grass sod, 
aquaculture (including ornamental fish), and industrial crops.
    <bullet> Specialty crops. Commodities in this group may or may not 
be covered under a Federal crop insurance plan and include, but are not 
limited to, fruits, vegetables, tree nuts, syrups, honey, roots, herbs, 
and highly specialized varieties of traditional crops.
    <bullet> Underserved commodities. This group includes: (a) 
Commodities, including livestock that are covered by a Federal crop 
insurance plan but for which participation in an area is below the 
national average; and (b) commodities, including livestock, with 
inadequate crop insurance coverage.

D. Objectives

    The project objectives listed below highlight the research 
priorities of RMA. The objectives are listed in priority order, with 
the most important objective designated as 1, the second most important 
designated as 2, etc. The order of priority will be considered in 
making awards. The suggested emphasis discussed within each objective 
is not meant to be exhaustive. Applicants may propose other topics 
within any project objective but justification for those topics must be 
provided.
    RMA encourages proposals that address multiple risks and will 
result in the development of tools that provide an integrated or 
holistic approach to risk mitigation. Preference will be given to such 
proposals.
    Proposals may address multiple objectives, but each proposal must 
specify a single primary objective for funding purposes.
    In the order of priority, the project objectives are:
    1. To develop risk management tools to assist producers in reducing 
the impact of multiple-year losses, such as the multiple-year losses 
due to sustained or recurring drought. (Maximum number of partnerships 
to be funded--4)
    2. To develop risk management tools to assist forage and rangeland 
producers in improving techniques for one or more of the following: 
Managing production, e.g., optimization of grazing patterns; 
establishing and maintaining forage production records; drought 
mitigation; harvesting or marketing production. (Maximum number of 
partnerships to be funded--4)
    3. To develop risk management tools to assist livestock producers 
in improving techniques for one or more of the following: Planning and 
managing the production of livestock, including disease management and 
control; improving techniques for breeding of livestock; managing 
price, revenue, or production and market risks. (Maximum number of 
partnerships to be funded--3)
    4. To develop risk management tools encouraging self-protection for 
production agricultural enterprises vulnerable to losses due to 
terrorism. (Maximum number of projects to be funded--3)
    5. To develop risk management tools to assist limited resource and/
or traditionally underserved farmers and ranchers and/or producers with 
limited English language proficiency. The tools developed under this 
objective should address risks that may be specific to the targeted 
producers and/or will assist the targeted producers in gaining 
meaningful access to existing risk management tools and information. 
(Definitions: A limited resource farmer is a producer or operator of a 
farm with an annual gross income of $20,000 or less derived from all 
sources of revenue or a producer on a farm of less than 25 acres 
(aggregated for all crops) where a majority of the producer's gross 
income from farming operations does not exceed $20,000; and/or direct 
or indirect gross farm sales not more than $100,000 in each of the 
previous two years adjusted for inflation using Prices Paid by Farmer 
Index as compiled by the National Agricultural Statistical Service 
(NASS) and a total household income at or below the national poverty 
level for a family of four, or less than 50 percent of county median 
household income in each of the previous two years. Traditionally 
underserved farmers and ranchers include: Women, African Americans, 
Asians and Pacific Islanders, American Indians and Alaskan Natives and 
Hispanics.) (Maximum number of partnerships to be funded--2)
    6. To clarify labor requirements and assist producers in complying 
with requirements to better meet the physically intense and time-
compressed planting, tending, and harvesting requirements associated 
with the production of specialty crops and underserved agricultural 
commodities. (Maximum number of partnerships to be funded--2)
    7. To develop risk management tools to further increase the 
economic and production stability of wild salmon fishermen. (Maximum 
number of projects to be funded--1)

II. Award Information

A. Award Description

    Approximately $4 million is available for partnership agreements 
that will fund risk management research activities. Awards under this 
program will be made on a competitive basis. Projects can also be in 
two parts with the first part including the research and feasibility 
studies and the second part including the development, implementation, 
delivery and maintenance of the risk management tool. If the 
development of the tool is determined not to be feasible, the 
partnership may be terminated by RMA after completion of the first part 
with funding reduced accordingly. There is

[[Page 29505]]

no commitment by USDA/RMA to fund any particular project or to make a 
specific number of awards. Applicants awarded a partnership agreement 
for an amount that is less than the amount requested will be required 
to modify their application to conform to the reduced amount before 
execution of the partnership agreement. No maximum or minimum funding 
levels have been established for individual projects. All awards will 
be made and agreements completed no later than September 30, 2004.
    Recipients of awards must demonstrate non-financial benefits from a 
partnership agreement and must agree to substantial involvement of RMA 
in the project. RMA encourages collaborative efforts and geographic 
diversity of proposed projects. In conducting activities to achieve the 
purpose of this proposed research, the recipient will be responsible 
for the activities listed under Section II. A. 1 of this part. RMA will 
be responsible for the activities listed under Section II. A. 2 of this 
part.
1. Recipient Activities
    The applicant will be required to perform the following activities:
    a. Finalize, in cooperation with RMA, the partnership agreement.
    b. Define non-financial benefits and the substantial involvement of 
the RMA.
    c. Coordinate, manage, document and implement the timely completion 
of the approved research and development activities.
    d. Abide by the plans and provisions contained in the partnership 
agreement.
    e. Report on program performance in accordance with the partnership 
agreement.
    f. The recipient may be required to make a presentation to the FCIC 
Board of Directors.
    g. Adhere to RMA guidelines for systems development and information 
technology development.
    h. In cooperation with RMA, determine the feasibility and if 
necessary collaborate in the development of a plan to administer, 
maintain, and update the risk management tool in the future.
2. RMA Activities
    a. Collaborate on the research plan;
    b. Advise the recipient on the materials available over the 
internet and through the RMA Web site (<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a>) and be 
involved in the gathering of any additional information that may be 
required;
    c. Collaborate with the recipient in all phases of the research and 
development of the risk management tool, and any educational efforts to 
enable producers to utilize the risk management tool; and
    d. Collaborate with the recipient in the development of all 
materials associated with the research and development program as it 
relates to publication or presentation of the results and the risk 
management tools to the public, any producer groups, RMA, and the FCIC 
Board of Directors.
    e. Collaborate with the recipient in the development of a proposal 
to administer, maintain and update the risk management tool in the 
future.

B. Other Activities

    In addition to the specific activities listed above, the applicant 
may suggest other activities that would contribute directly to the 
purpose of this program. For any additional activity suggested, the 
applicant should identify the objective of the activity, the specific 
tasks required to meet the objective, specific timelines for performing 
the tasks, and specific responsibilities of the partners. For any 
additional activity suggested, the applicant should identify specific 
ways in which RMA could or should have substantial involvement in that 
activity.

III. Eligibility Information

A. Eligible Applicants

    Proposals are invited from qualified public and private entities. 
Eligible applicants include colleges and universities, Federal, State, 
and local agencies, Native American tribal organizations, non-profit 
and for-profit private organizations or corporations, and other 
entities. Individuals are not eligible applicants. Although an 
applicant may be eligible to compete for an award based on its status 
as an eligible entity, other factors may exclude an applicant from 
receiving Federal assistance under this program (e.g., debarment and 
suspension; a determination of non-performance on a prior contract, 
cooperative agreement, grant or partnership; a determination of a 
violation of applicable ethical standards).

B. Cost Sharing or Matching

    Cost sharing, matching, in-kind contributions, or cost 
participation is not required.

C. Other

    Applicants must be able to demonstrate they will receive non-
financial benefits as a result of the partnership agreement. Non-
financial benefits must accrue to the applicant and must include more 
than the ability to provide employment income to the applicant or for 
the applicant's employees or the community. The applicant must 
demonstrate that performance under the partnership agreement will 
further the specific mission of the applicant (such as providing 
research or activities necessary for graduate or other students to 
complete educational programs). Refer to part V. for evaluation 
criteria and weights.

IV. Application and Submission Information

A. Address To Request Application Package

    Applicants may download an application package from the Risk 
Management Agency Web site at: <a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">www.rma.usda.gov</a>. Applicants may also 
request an application package from: USDA, RMA/RED, 6501 Beacon Drive, 
Stop 0813, Kansas City, Missouri 64133-4676, phone: (816) 926-6343, 
fax: (816) 926-7343, e-mail: <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#d7859a96859293f996a7a7bbbeb4b6a3beb8b997a5bab6f9a2a4b3b6f9b0b8a1"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="287a65697a6d6c0669585844414b495c414746685a4549065d5b4c49064f475e">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>. Completed 
and signed application packages sent via the U.S. Postal Service must 
be sent to the same address. Applicants using the U.S. Postal Service 
should allow for extra security-processing time for mail delivered to 
government offices.

B. Content and Form of Application Submission

    A complete and valid application package must include an original, 
twelve complete paper copies, and one copy (Microsoft Word format 
preferred) of the application package on diskette or compact disc, and:
    1. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424, ``Application for 
Federal Assistance''.
    2. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424-A, ``Budget 
Information--Non-construction Programs''. Reviewers will need 
sufficient information to effectively evaluate the budget. Indirect 
cost for projects submitted in response to this solicitation are 
limited to 10 percent of the total direct cost of the agreement. A 
sample budget narrative, including suggestions for format and content, 
is available on the RMA Web site (<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">www.rma.usda.gov</a>) or upon request.
    3. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424-B, ``Assurances, 
Non-construction Programs''.
    4. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form LLL, ``Disclosure of 
Lobbying Activities.''
    5. A completed and signed AD-1047, ``Certification Regarding 
Debarment, Suspension and Other Responsibility Matters (Primary Covered 
Transactions.'')

[[Page 29506]]

    6. A completed and signed AD-1049, ``Certification Regarding Drug-
Free Workplace.''
    7. A statement of the non-financial benefits of any partnership 
agreement to the recipient. (Refer to Part II.B ``Non-financial 
Benefits'').
    8. A completed Form R&D-1, ``Title Page and Proposal Summary.'' 
Each proposal must specify the single primary objective for evaluation 
and funding purposes. The same or similar proposals cannot be submitted 
multiple times with different primary objectives specified. If the same 
or similar proposals are submitted, the first received will be the only 
one evaluated.
    9. A proposal narrative submitted with the application package 
should be limited to 10 single-sided pages. Reviewers will need 
sufficient information to effectively evaluate the application under 
the criteria contained in part V. A sample narrative, including 
suggestions for format and content, is available on the RMA Web site 
(<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">www.rma.usda.gov</a>) or upon request.
    10. An appendix containing any attachments that may support 
information in the narrative (Optional).
    11. A completed Form R&D-2, ``Statement of Work.''
    Applicants are responsible for ensuring the application materials 
are received by the closing date. Incomplete application packages will 
not receive further consideration.

C. Submission Dates and Times

    The closing date and time for receipt of an application is 5 p.m. 
c.d.t. on July 8, 2004. Applications received after the deadline will 
not be evaluated by the technical review panel and will not be 
considered for funding.

D. Funding Restrictions

    No maximum or minimum funding levels have been established for 
individual projects or for categories of objectives. The funding level 
by category of objective will be determined by FCIC. Indirect cost for 
projects submitted in response to this solicitation are limited to 10 
percent of total direct cost of the agreement.
    Partnership agreement funds may not be used to:
    1. Plan, repair, rehabilitate, acquire, or construct a building or 
facility including a processing facility;
    2. To purchase, rent, or install fixed equipment;
    3. Repair or maintain privately owned vehicles;
    4. Pay for the preparation of the partnership application;
    5. Fund political activities;
    6. Pay costs incurred prior to receiving this partnership 
agreement;
    7. Fund any activities prohibited in 7 CFR parts 3015 and 3019, as 
applicable.

E. Other Submission Requirements

    1. An original and twelve (12) complete paper copies of the 
completed and signed application, and one copy (Microsoft Word format 
preferred) on diskette or compact disc must be submitted in one package 
at the time of initial submission.
    2. Applicants are encouraged to submit completed and signed 
application packages using overnight mail or delivery service to ensure 
timely receipt by the USDA. The applicable address for such submissions 
is: RMA/RED Partnership Agreement Program, USDA, RMA/RED, 6501 Beacon 
Drive, Stop 0813, Kansas City, Missouri 64133-4676.
    3. All applications must be submitted and received by the deadline. 
Applications that do not meet all of the requirements in this 
announcement are considered incomplete applications. Late or incomplete 
applications will not be considered in this competition and will be 
returned to the applicant.
    4. Applications submitted through express, overnight mail or 
another delivery service will be considered as meeting the announced 
deadline if they are received in the mailroom at the address stated 
above for express, overnight mail or another delivery service on or 
before the deadline. Applicants are cautioned that express, overnight 
mail or other delivery services do not always deliver as agreed. 
Applicants should take this into account because failure of such 
delivery services will not extend the deadline. The address must appear 
on the envelope or package containing the application with the note 
``'Attention: RMA/RED Partnership Application.''
    Mailed applications will be considered meeting the announced 
deadline if they are received on or before the deadline in the mailroom 
at the address stated above for mailed applications. Applicants are 
responsible for mailing applications well in advance, to ensure that 
applications are received on or before the deadline time and date. 
Applicants using the U.S. Postal Service should allow for the extra 
time for delivery due to the additional security measures that mail 
delivered to government offices now require.
    5. RMA cannot accommodate transmissions of applications by 
facsimile or through other electronic media. Therefore, applications 
transmitted electronically will not be accepted regardless of the date 
or time of submission or the time of receipt.

V. Application Review Information

A. Criteria

1. Research Objectives--Maximum 40 Points
    The application must receive a minimum score of 32 points under 
this criterion in order to be considered for further evaluation and 
funding. Applications receiving less than 32 points will be eliminated 
and will not be evaluated under criteria 2 through 5.
    The proposal clearly defines the development, management and 
implementation of a risk management tool designed to meet the needs of 
the producers outlined for at least one of the objectives listed in 
part I.D. Proposals that best meet the objective and are innovative, 
clear, concise, useful, easy to understand, and address multiple risks 
that result in the development of tools that provide an integrated or 
holistic approach to risk mitigation will be given the highest score.
2. Indication of RMA Involvement and Non-financial Benefits--Maximum 10 
Points
    The proposal clearly indicates areas of substantial involvement by 
RMA and clearly indicates benefits derived from the partnership that 
extends beyond the financial benefits or funding of the research 
proposal. Those proposals that clearly outline the involvement of RMA 
in all aspects of the project and demonstrate non-financial benefit 
will receive the highest score. Examples of non-financial benefits 
would be the benefits derived by an educational institution by 
providing research opportunities to students or benefits derived 
through the furtherance of an organization's mission.
3. Research Approach, Methodology, Development and Implementation--
Maximum 40 Points
    The proposal clearly demonstrates a sound research approach and 
defines the methodology to be used as well as describes the development 
and implementation of the risk management tool. Proposals that 
demonstrate a clear, concise and generally accepted research 
methodology and innovative approach will receive the highest number of 
points.
4. Management--Maximum 10 Points
    The proposal clearly demonstrates the applicant's ability and 
resources to coordinate and manage all aspects of the proposed research 
project. The applicant whose approach is the most cost effective and 
optimizes the use and effective application of the funding will receive 
the highest score.

[[Page 29507]]

B. Review and Selection Process

    Each application will be evaluated using a four-part process. 
First, each application will be screened by RMA to ensure that each 
proposal specifies a single primary objective for evaluation and 
funding purposes and the proposal meets the objectives stated in part 
I.D. The same or similar proposals cannot be submitted multiple times 
with different primary objectives specified. If the same or similar 
proposals are submitted, the first received will be the only one 
evaluated. Applications that do not meet the objectives stated in part 
I.D and all other requirements in this announcement or are incomplete 
will not receive further consideration.
    Second, all eligible applications will be evaluated using the 
criterion in part V.A.1. Applications must score at least 32 points 
under this criteria in order to be to be evaluated further. Third, all 
applications scoring the required 32 points will be evaluated further 
under part V.A.2 through 4. For the second and third steps, a review 
panel will consider the merits of all applications that are complete 
and meet the objectives in part I.D. and all other requirements in this 
announcement. The evaluation of each application will be conducted by a 
panel of not less than three independent reviewers. The panel will be 
comprised of representatives from USDA, other federal agencies, and 
others representing public and private organizations, as needed. The 
narrative and any appendixes provided by each applicant will be used by 
the review panel to evaluate the merits of the project that is being 
proposed for funding. The panel will examine and score applications 
based on the evaluation criteria and weights contained in part V.A. In 
order to be considered for funding, an application must meet or exceed 
a minimum number of points established by computing the average score 
of all evaluated applications in all objectives. For the last step, 
those applications meeting the minimum number of points will be listed 
in initial rank order by objective. The highest-ranking proposal for 
each objective will be funded in the order of priority (the highest 
ranking proposal meeting objective 1 will be funded first and the 
highest ranking proposal meeting objective 2 will be funded second, 
etc.). It is possible that funds could be exhausted before funding 
projects for every objective. If there are sufficient funds, the 
process will be repeated until the maximum number of partnerships for 
each objective has been funded. The maximum number of partnerships to 
be funded under each objective is listed with the objectives in part 
I.D. The projects selected for funding will be presented, along with 
funding level recommendations, to the Manager of FCIC, who will make 
the final decision on awarding of a partnership agreement.
    If the Manager of FCIC determines that any application is 
sufficiently similar to a project that has been funded or has been 
recommended to be funded under this announcement or any other research 
and development program, then the Manager may elect to not fund that 
application in whole or in part.

VI. Award Administration Information

A. Award Notices

    Receipt of applications will be acknowledged by e-mail, whenever 
possible. Therefore, each applicant is encouraged to provide an e-mail 
address in the application. If an e-mail address is not indicated on an 
application, receipt will be acknowledged by letter. There will be no 
notification of incomplete, unqualified or unfunded applications until 
the awards have been made.
    When received by RMA, applications will be assigned an 
identification number. This number will be communicated to applicants 
in the acknowledgement of receipt of applications. An application 
identification number should be referenced in all correspondence 
regarding the application. If the applicant does not receive an 
acknowledgement within 15 days of the submission deadline, the 
applicant should contact the Research and Development Division at (816) 
926-6343.

B. Administrative and National Policy Requirements

1. Access to Panel Review Information
    Upon written request, scores from the evaluation panel, not 
including the identity of reviewers, will be sent to the applicant 
after the review and awards process has been completed.
2. Notification of Partnership Agreement Awards and Notification of 
Non-Selection
    Following approval of the applications selected for funding, notice 
of project approval and authority to draw down funds will be made to 
the selected applicants in writing. Within the limit of funds available 
for such purpose, the awarding official of RMA shall enter into 
partnership agreements with those applicants whose applications are 
judged to be most meritorious under the procedures set forth in this 
announcement. The partnership agreement provides the amount of Federal 
funds for use in the project period, the terms and conditions of the 
award, and the time period for the project.
    The effective date of the partnership agreement shall be the date 
the agreement is executed by both parties. All funds provided to the 
applicant by FCIC must be expended solely for the purpose for which 
funds are obligated in accordance with the approved application and 
budget, the regulations, the terms and conditions of the award, and the 
applicability of Federal cost principles. No commitment of Federal 
assistance beyond the project period is made or implied, as a result of 
any award made pursuant to this announcement.
    Notification of denial of funding will be sent to applicants after 
final funding decisions have been made. Reasons for denial of funding 
can include incomplete proposals, proposals that did not meet the 
objectives, scored low or were duplicative.
3. Confidential Aspects of Proposals and Awards
    When an application results in a partnership agreement, it becomes 
a part of the official record of RMA transactions, available to the 
public upon specific request. Information that the Secretary of 
Agriculture determines to be of a confidential, privileged, or 
proprietary nature will be held in confidence to the extent permitted 
by law. Therefore, any information that the applicant wishes to be 
considered confidential, privileged, or proprietary should be clearly 
marked within the application, including the basis for such 
designation. The original copy of a proposal that does not result in an 
award will be retained by RMA for a period of one year. Other copies 
will be destroyed. Such a proposal will be released only with the 
express written consent of the applicant or to the extent required by 
law. A proposal may be withdrawn at any time prior to award.
4. Audit Requirements
    Applicants awarded the partnership agreements are subject to audit.
5. Prohibitions and Requirements With Regard to Lobbying
    Section 1352 of Public Law 101-121, enacted on October 23, 1989, 
imposes prohibitions and requirements for disclosure and certification 
related to lobbying on recipients of Federal contracts, grants, 
cooperative agreements, and loans. It provides exemptions for Indian 
Tribes and tribal

[[Page 29508]]

organizations. Current and prospective recipients, and any 
subcontractors, are prohibited from using Federal funds, other than 
profits from a Federal contract, for lobbying Congress or any Federal 
agency in connection with the award of a contract, grant, cooperative 
agreement, or loan. In addition, for each award action in excess of 
$100,000 ($150,000 for loans) the law requires recipients and any 
subcontractors (1) to certify that they have neither used nor will use 
any appropriated funds for payments of lobbyists; (2) to disclose the 
name, address, payment details, and purpose of any agreements with 
lobbyists whom recipients or subcontractors will pay with profit or 
other nonappropriated funds on or after December 22, 1989; (3) to file 
quarterly updates about the use of lobbyists if material changes occur 
in their use. The law establishes civil penalties for non-compliance. A 
copy of the certification and disclosure forms must be submitted with 
the application and are available from David Fulk at the above stated 
address and telephone number.
6. Applicable OMB Circulars
    All partnership and cooperative agreements funded as a result of 
this notice will be subject to the requirements contained in all 
applicable OMB circulars.

C. Reporting

    Applicants awarded a partnership agreement will be required to 
submit quarterly progress and financial reports (SF-269) throughout the 
project period, as well as a final program and financial report not 
later than 90 days after the end of the project period.

VII. Agency Contact

    If applicants have any questions they may contact: USDA, RMA/RED, 
6501 Beacon Drive, Stop 0813, Kansas City, Missouri 64133-4676, or 
phone: (816) 926-6343, or fax: (816) 926-7343, or e-mail: <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#3a68777b687f7e657b4a4a5653595b4e5355547a48575b144f495e5b145d554c"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="23716e627166677c6253534f4a4042574a4c4d63514e420d565047420d444c55">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>.

VIII. Other Information

    The names of applicants, the names of individuals identified in the 
applications, the content of applications, and the panel evaluations of 
applications will all be kept confidential, except to those involved in 
the review process, to the extent permitted by law. In addition, the 
identities of review panel members will remain confidential throughout 
the entire review process and will not be released to applicants. At 
the end of the fiscal year, names of panel members will be made 
available. However, panelists will not be identified with the review of 
any particular application.

    Dated: May 19, 2004.
Ross J. Davidson, Jr.,
Manager, Federal Crop Insurance Corporation.
[FR Doc. 04-11615 Filed 5-21-04; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3410-08-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>