<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 70 Issue 99 (Tuesday, May 24, 2005)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 70, Number 99 (Tuesday, May 24, 2005)]
[Notices]
[Pages 29715-29720]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 05-10252]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Federal Crop Insurance Corporation


Request for Applications (RFA): Research and Development Risk 
Management Research Partnerships; Correction

    Announcement Type: Notice of availability of funds and request for 
application for risk management research partnerships; Correction.
    CFDA Number: 10.456.
    Dates: The closing date and time for receipt of an application is 
5:00 p.m. C.D.T. on July 5, 2005. Applications received after the 
deadline will not be evaluated by the technical review panel and will 
not be considered for funding. All awards will be made and agreements 
completed no later than September 30, 2005.
    Summary: Due to technical errors, the following notice supersedes 
the original Request for Applications, published on May 6, 2005, for 
Research and Development Risk Management Research Partnerships at 70 FR 
23969-23975.
    Overview: The purpose of the Risk Management Research Partnerships 
is to fund the development of non-insurance risk management tools that 
will be utilized by agricultural producers to assist them in mitigating 
the risks inherent in agricultural production. The proposals must 
address at least one of the ten objectives listed in part I.D. In 
addition, all proposals must clearly demonstrate the usefulness and 
benefits of the tool to producers of priority commodities and provide a 
plan for ongoing maintenance and support as

[[Page 29716]]

described in part III.C.2. Approximately $4 million is available to 
fund an undetermined number of partnerships. Projects may be funded for 
a period of up to three years. Applications are accepted from public 
and private entities; individuals are not eligible to apply. No cost 
sharing by the applicant is required. There are no limitations on the 
number of applications each applicant may submit.

I. Funding Opportunity Description

A. Background

    The Risk Management Agency (RMA), on behalf of the Federal Crop 
Insurance Corporation (FCIC), is committed to meeting the risk 
management needs and improving or developing risk management tools for 
the nation's farmers and ranchers. It does this by offering Federal 
crop insurance and other risk management products and tools through a 
network of private-sector entities and by overseeing the creation of 
new products, seeking enhancements in existing products, and by 
expanding the use of a variety of risk management tools. Risk 
management tools include a variety of risk management options and 
strategies developed to assist producers in mitigating the risks 
inherent in agricultural production. Risk management tools may include: 
Financial management tools to mitigate price and production risks; 
tools to enhance measurement and prediction of risks in order to 
facilitate risk diversification; tools to improve production 
management, harvesting, record keeping or marketing. For the purposes 
of this announcement, risk management tools do not include insurance 
products, plans of insurance, policies, modifications thereof or any 
related material.

B. Purpose

    The purpose of this program is to fund partnership agreements that 
assist producers, minimize their production risks, and/or develop risk 
management tools. The agreements are for the development of risk 
management tools for use directly by agricultural producers. To aid in 
meeting these goals each partnership agreement awarded through this 
program will provide the recipient with funds, guidance, and the 
substantial involvement of RMA to carry out these risk management 
initiatives. Applications requesting funding for the development of 
insurance products, plans of insurance, policies, modifications thereof 
or related materials are excluded from consideration under this 
announcement.

C. Authorization

    In accordance with section 522(d) of the Federal Crop Insurance Act 
(Act), FCIC announces the availability of funding for risk management 
research activities. Priority will be given to those activities 
addressing the need for risk management tools for producers of the 
following agricultural commodities (For purposes of this announcement, 
these commodities are collectively referred to as ``Priority 
Commodities.''):
    <bullet> Agricultural commodities covered by section 196 of the 
Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 U.S.C. 7333) (Noninsured 
Assistance Program (NAP)). Commodities in this group are commercial 
crops that are not covered by catastrophic risk protection crop 
insurance, are used for food or fiber (except livestock), and 
specifically include, but are not limited to, floricultural, ornamental 
nursery, Christmas trees, turf grass sod, aquaculture (including 
ornamental fish), and industrial crops.
    <bullet> Specialty crops. Commodities in this group may or may not 
be covered under a Federal crop insurance plan and include, but are not 
limited to, fruits, vegetables, tree nuts, syrups, honey, roots, herbs, 
and highly specialized varieties of traditional crops.
    <bullet> Underserved commodities. This group includes: (a) 
Commodities, including livestock that are covered by a Federal crop 
insurance plan but for which participation in an area is below the 
national average; and (b) commodities, including livestock, with 
inadequate crop insurance coverage.

D. Objectives

    The project objectives listed below highlight the research 
priorities of RMA. The objectives are listed in priority order, with 
the most important objective designated as 1, the second most important 
designated as 2, etc. The order of priority will be considered in 
making awards. The suggested emphasis discussed within each objective 
is not meant to be exhaustive. Applicants may propose other topics 
within any project objective but justification for those topics must be 
provided.
    RMA encourages proposals that address multiple risks and will 
result in the development of tools that provide an integrated or 
holistic approach to risk mitigation. Preference will be given to such 
proposals.
    Proposals may address multiple objectives, but each proposal must 
specify a single primary objective for funding purposes.
    In the order of priority, the project objectives are:
    1.To develop risk management tools to assist producers in finding 
alternative products, techniques or strategies related to disease 
management (e.g., soybean rust) and/or pest mitigation under various 
farming practices.
    2. To develop risk management tools to assist producers in reducing 
the impact of multiple-year losses, such as the multiple-year losses 
due to sustained or recurring drought and to increase the economic and 
production stability of agricultural producers.
    3. To develop risk management tools to assist forage and rangeland 
producers in improving techniques for one or more of the following: 
Managing production, e.g., optimization of grazing patterns; 
establishing and maintaining forage production records; drought 
mitigation; and harvesting or marketing production.
    4. To develop risk management tools to assist limited resource and/
or traditionally underserved farmers and ranchers and/or producers with 
limited English language proficiency that traditionally produce 
agricultural commodities covered by NAP, specialty crops and 
underserved agricultural commodities. The tools developed under this 
objective should address risks that may be specific to the targeted 
producers and/or will assist the targeted producers in gaining 
meaningful access to existing risk management tools and information. 
(Definitions: A limited resource farmer is a producer or operator of a 
farm with an annual gross income of $20,000 or less derived from all 
sources of revenue or a producer on a farm of less than 25 acres 
(aggregated for all crops) where a majority of the producer's gross 
income from farming operations does not exceed $20,000; and/or direct 
or indirect gross farm sales not more than $100,000 in each of the 
previous two years adjusted for inflation using Prices Paid by Farmer 
Index as compiled by the National Agricultural Statistical Service 
(NASS) and a total household income at or below the national poverty 
level for a family of four, or less than 50 percent of county median 
household income in each of the previous two years (to be determined 
annually using Commerce Department Data). Underserved farmers and 
ranchers include: Women, African Americans, Asians and Pacific 
Islanders, American Indians, Alaskan Natives, and Hispanics.)
    5. To develop risk management tools to assist livestock producers 
in improving techniques for one or more of the following: planning and 
managing the production of livestock, including disease management and 
control; improving techniques for breeding of

[[Page 29717]]

livestock; and managing price, revenue, or production and market risks.
    6. To develop risk management tools to assist agricultural 
producers in developing a better understanding of the interaction of 
financial markets, marketing, crop insurance, and production costs and 
assist producers in the determination of the optimal combination of 
risk management strategies.
    7. To clarify labor requirements and assist producers in complying 
with requirements to better meet the physically intense and time-
compressed planting, tending, and harvesting requirements associated 
with the production of specialty crops and underserved agricultural 
commodities.
    8. To develop risk management tools encouraging self-protection for 
production agricultural enterprises vulnerable to losses due to 
terrorism.
    9. To provide risk management tools to State foresters or 
equivalent officials for the prescribed use of burning on private 
forest land for the prevention, control and suppression of fire.
    10. To develop risk management tools to further increase the 
economic and production stability of wild salmon fishermen.

II. Award Information

A. Award Description

    Approximately $4 million is available for partnership agreements 
that will fund the development of risk management tools. Awards under 
this program will be made on a competitive basis. Projects may be 
funded for a period of up to three years for the activities described 
in this announcement. Projects can also be in two parts with the first 
part including the research and feasibility studies and the second part 
including the development, implementation, delivery and maintenance of 
the risk management tool. If the development of the tool is determined 
not to be feasible, the partnership may be terminated by RMA after 
completion of the first part with funding reduced accordingly.
    There is no commitment by RMA to fund any particular project or to 
make a specific number of awards. Applicants awarded a partnership 
agreement for an amount that is less than the amount requested will be 
required to modify their application to conform to the reduced amount 
before execution of the partnership agreement. No maximum or minimum 
funding levels have been established for individual projects. All 
awards will be made and agreements completed no later than September 
30, 2005.
    Recipients of awards must demonstrate non-financial benefits from a 
partnership agreement and must agree to substantial involvement of RMA 
in the project. RMA encourages collaborative efforts and geographic 
diversity of proposed projects.
    In conducting activities to achieve the purpose of this proposed 
research, the recipient will be responsible for the activities listed 
under Section II. A. 1 of this part. RMA will be responsible for the 
activities listed under Section II. A. 2 of this part.
1. Recipient Activities
    The applicant will be required to perform the following activities:
    a. Finalize, in cooperation with RMA, the partnership agreement.
    b. Finalize, in cooperation with RMA, the plan to administer, 
maintain and update the risk management tool in the future. The 
applicant must develop a plan for the delivery of the risk management 
tool to producers and the ongoing maintenance and support of the risk 
management tool, including how the applicant will fund the delivery, 
support, maintenance and updating of the tool to maintain its 
applicability, benefits, usefulness, and value to producers. The 
applicant must also deliver the risk management tool to producers and 
support, maintain and update the tool as applicable.
    c. Define non-financial benefits and the substantial involvement of 
the RMA.
    d. Coordinate, manage, document and implement the timely completion 
of the approved research and development activities.
    e. Abide by the plans and provisions contained in the partnership 
agreement.
    f. Report on program performance in accordance with the partnership 
agreement.
    g. The recipient may be required to make a presentation to the FCIC 
Board of Directors.
    h. Adhere to RMA guidelines for systems development and information 
technology development.
2. RMA Activities
    RMA will be substantially involved during the performance of the 
funded activity. Potential types of substantial involvement may 
include, but are not limited to the following activities:
    a. Collaborate on the research plan;
    b. Assist in the selection of subcontractors and project staff;
    c. Review and approve critical stages of project development before 
subsequent stages may be started;
    d. Provide assistance in the management or technical performance of 
the project;
    e. Collaborate with the recipient in the development of materials 
associated with the funded project, as it relates to publication or 
presentation of the results and the distribution of the risk management 
tools to the public, any producer groups, RMA, and the FCIC Board of 
Directors;
    f. Assist in the collection of data and information that may be 
available in RMA databases;
    g. Collaborate with the recipient in the development of a proposal 
to administer, maintain and update the risk management tool in the 
future; and
    h. Similar type of activities.

B. Other Activities

    In addition to the specific activities listed above, the applicant 
may suggest other activities that would contribute directly to the 
purpose of this program. For any additional activity suggested, the 
applicant should identify the objective of the activity, the specific 
tasks required to meet the objective, specific timelines for performing 
the tasks, and specific responsibilities of the partners. For any 
additional activity suggested, the applicant should identify specific 
ways in which RMA could or should have substantial involvement in that 
activity.

III. Eligibility Information

A. Eligible Applicants

    Proposals are invited from qualified public and private entities. 
Eligible applicants include colleges and universities, Federal, State, 
and local agencies, Native American tribal organizations, non-profit 
and for-profit private organizations or corporations, and other 
entities. Individuals are not eligible applicants.
    Although an applicant may be eligible to compete for an award based 
on its status as an eligible entity, other factors may exclude an 
applicant from receiving Federal assistance under this program (e.g., 
debarment and suspension; a determination of non-performance on a prior 
contract, cooperative agreement, grant or partnership; a determination 
of a violation of applicable ethical standards).

B. Cost Sharing or Matching

    Cost sharing, matching, in-kind contributions, or cost 
participation is not required.

C. Other

    1. Applicants must demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed risk 
management tool and the benefits of the tool to producers of priority 
commodities. Applicants must include

[[Page 29718]]

information supporting the need for the tool, such as a market 
analysis, or communications from producers or producer organizations 
expressing a need for the proposed tool. The proposal must also clearly 
define how the proposed tool will meet the needs of the producer groups 
identified. The second objective is that the proposed risk management 
tool meet specific identified needs of the producer and the proposed 
risk management tool be supported by the applicant without the need of 
resources from RMA. Refer to part V.B for the review and selection 
process.
    2. If the project proposed for development requires ongoing 
maintenance, support and delivery to producers beyond the development 
stage, the applicant must submit a plan to continue the maintenance, 
support and delivery of the tool without relying on RMA's resources. If 
the applicant does not plan to directly support, maintain and deliver 
the tool using non-award funds after the development period funded by 
this award is completed, then the proposal should identify a third 
party sponsor who will do so. For example, if a proposed tool would 
require constant updating of data and availability on a website in 
order to be utilized by producers, then a sponsor should be identified 
that would be able to provide the funds necessary to maintain and host 
the tool. Third party sponsors may include government agencies, grower 
organizations, industry organizations, private sector entities, etc. If 
the tool proposed does not require support, maintenance, updating or 
revisions to maintain applicability or value or does not require 
continued delivery to producers, the proposal should so state and 
provide the basis why such actions are not required. Refer to part V.B 
for the review and selection process.
    3. Applicants must be able to demonstrate they will receive non-
financial benefits as a result of the partnership agreement. Non-
financial benefits must accrue to the applicant and must include more 
than the ability to provide employment income to the applicant or for 
the applicant's employees or the community. The applicant must 
demonstrate that performance under the partnership agreement will 
further the specific mission of the applicant (such as providing 
research or activities necessary for graduate or other students to 
complete educational programs). Refer to part V.A.2 for evaluation 
criteria.

IV. Application and Submission Information

A. Address To Request Application Package

    Applicants may download an application package from the Risk 
Management Agency Web site at: <a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a>. Applicants may 
also request an application package from: RMA/RED Partnership Agreement 
Program, USDA, RMA/RED, 6501 Beacon Drive, Stop 0813, Kansas City, 
Missouri 64133-4676, phone: (816) 926-6343, fax: (816) 926-7343, e-
mail: <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#540619150611107a152424383d3735203d3b3a142639357a212730357a333b22"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="e8baa5a9baadacc6a9989884818b899c818786a89a8589c69d9b8c89c68f879e">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>.
    Completed and signed application packages must be sent to: RMA/RED 
Partnership Agreement Program, USDA, RMA/RED, 6501 Beacon Drive, Stop 
0813, Kansas City, Missouri 64133-4676. Applicants are encouraged to 
submit completed and signed application packages using overnight mail 
or delivery service to ensure timely receipt by the USDA. Applicants 
using the U.S. Postal Service should allow for extra security-
processing time for mail delivered to government offices.

B. Content and Form of Application Submission

    A complete and valid application package must include an original, 
twelve complete paper copies are requested, three copies are required, 
and one copy (Microsoft Word format preferred) of the application 
package on diskette or compact disc, and:
    1. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424, ``Application for 
Federal Assistance.''
    2. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424-A, ``Budget 
Information--Non-construction Programs.'' Reviewers will need 
sufficient information to effectively evaluate the budget. Indirect 
cost for projects submitted in response to this solicitation are 
limited to 10 percent of the total direct cost of the agreement. A 
sample budget narrative, including suggestions for format and content, 
is available on the RMA Web site (<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a>) or upon 
request.
    3. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424-B, ``Assurances, 
Non-construction Programs.''
    4. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form LLL, ``Disclosure of 
Lobbying Activities.''
    5. A completed and signed AD-1047, ``Certification Regarding 
Debarment, Suspension and Other Responsibility Matters (Primary Covered 
Transactions.'')
    6. A completed and signed AD-1049, ``Certification Regarding Drug-
Free Workplace.''
    7. A statement of the non-financial benefits of any partnership 
agreement to the recipient. (Refer to part II.B ``Non-financial 
Benefits.'')
    8. A completed Form R&D-1, ``Title Page and Proposal Summary.'' 
Each proposal must specify the single primary objective for evaluation 
and funding purposes. The same or similar proposals cannot be submitted 
multiple times with different primary objectives specified. If the same 
or similar proposals are submitted, the first received will be the only 
one evaluated.
    9. A proposal narrative submitted with the application package 
should be limited to 10 single-sided pages. Reviewers will need 
sufficient information to effectively evaluate the application under 
the criteria contained in part V. A sample narrative, including 
suggestions for format and content, is available on the RMA website 
(<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a>) or upon request.
    10. An appendix containing any attachments that may support 
information in the narrative (Optional).
    11. A completed Form R&D-2, ``Statement of Work.''
    Applicants are responsible for ensuring the application materials 
are received by the closing date. Incomplete application packages will 
not receive further consideration.

C. Submission Dates and Times

    The closing date and time for receipt of an application is 5 p.m. 
CDT on July 5, 2005. Applications received after the deadline will not 
be evaluated by the technical review panel and will not be considered 
for funding.

D. Funding Restrictions

    No maximum or minimum funding levels have been established for 
individual projects or for categories of objectives. The funding level 
by category of objective will be determined by FCIC. Indirect cost for 
projects submitted in response to this solicitation are limited to 10 
percent of total direct cost of the agreement. Each project may be 
funded for a period of up to three years for the activities described 
in this announcement.
    Partnership agreement funds may not be used to:
    1. Plan, repair, rehabilitate, acquire, or construct a building or 
facility including a processing facility;
    2. To purchase, rent, or install fixed equipment;
    3. Repair or maintain privately owned vehicles;
    4. Pay for the preparation of the partnership application;
    5. Fund political activities;
    6. Pay costs incurred prior to receiving this partnership 
agreement;

[[Page 29719]]

    7. Fund any activities prohibited in 7 CFR Parts 3015 and 3019, as 
applicable.

E. Other Submission Requirements

    1. An original and twelve (12) paper copies are requested, three 
copies are required, of the complete and signed application, and one 
copy (Microsoft Word format preferred) on diskette or compact disc must 
be submitted in one package at the time of initial submission.
    2. All applications must be submitted and received by the deadline. 
Applications that do not meet all of the requirements in this 
announcement are considered incomplete applications. Late or incomplete 
applications will not be considered in this competition and will be 
returned to the applicant.
    3. Applications will be considered as meeting the announced 
deadline if they are received in the mailroom at the address stated 
above service on or before the deadline. Applicants are cautioned that 
express, overnight mail or other delivery services do not always 
deliver as agreed. Applicants are responsible for mailing applications 
well in advance, to ensure that applications are received on or before 
the deadline time and date. Applicants should be aware that there may 
be significant delays in delivery if applications are mailed using the 
U.S. Postal Service due to the additional security measures that mail 
delivered to government offices now require. Applicants should take 
this into account because failure of such delivery services will not 
extend the deadline.
    4. Although the application package may be downloaded 
electronically, RMA cannot accommodate transmissions of application 
submissions by facsimile or through other electronic media. Therefore, 
applications transmitted electronically will not be accepted regardless 
of the date or time of submission or the time of receipt.

V. Application Review Information

A. Criteria

1. Research Objectives--Maximum 40 points
    The application must receive a minimum score of 28 points under 
this criterion in order to be considered for further evaluation and 
funding. Applications receiving less than 28 points will be eliminated 
and will not be evaluated under criteria 2 through 4.
    The proposal must clearly define the development, management and 
implementation of a risk management tool designed to meet the needs of 
the producers outlined for at least one of the objectives listed in 
part I.D. Proposals that best meet the objective and are innovative, 
clear, concise, useful, easy to understand, and address multiple risks 
that result in the development of tools that provide an integrated or 
holistic approach to risk mitigation will be given the highest score. 
The proposal will be reviewed to determine if it is similar to a 
project that has been funded, has been recommended for funding, or is 
currently under development through other means.
2. Indication of RMA Involvement and Non-Financial Benefits--Maximum 10 
Points
    The proposal clearly indicates areas of substantial involvement by 
RMA and clearly indicates benefits derived from the partnership that 
extend beyond the financial benefits or funding of the research 
proposal. Those proposals that clearly outline the involvement of RMA 
in all aspects of the project and demonstrate non-financial benefit 
will receive the highest score. Examples of non-financial benefits 
would be the benefits derived by an educational institution by 
providing research opportunities to students or benefits derived 
through the furtherance of an organization's mission.
3. Research Approach, Methodology, Development and Implementation--
Maximum 40 Points
    The proposal clearly demonstrates a sound research approach and 
defines the methodology to be used as well as describes the development 
and implementation of the risk management tool. Proposals that 
demonstrate a clear, concise and generally accepted research 
methodology and innovative approach will receive the highest number of 
points.
4. Management--Maximum 10 Points
    The proposal clearly demonstrates the applicant's ability and 
resources to coordinate and manage all aspects of the proposed research 
project. The applicant whose approach is the most cost effective and 
optimizes the use and effective application of the funding will receive 
the highest score.

B. Review and Selection Process

    Each application will be evaluated using a five-part process. 
First, each application will be screened by RMA to ensure that each 
proposal specifies a single primary objective for evaluation and 
funding purposes and the proposal meets the objectives stated in part 
I.D. The same or similar proposals cannot be submitted multiple times 
with different primary objectives specified. If the same or similar 
proposals are submitted, the first received will be the only one 
evaluated. Applications that do not meet the objectives stated in part 
I.D and all other requirements in this announcement or are incomplete 
will not receive further consideration.
    Second, the proposal must clearly demonstrate the usefulness of the 
tool and the benefits of the tool to producers of priority commodities 
and demonstrate that there is a reasonable expectation that the tool 
will actually be used by a substantial number of such producers. Any 
proposal that does not do this will not receive further consideration.
    Third, the plan will be evaluated to ensure that the risk 
management tool can be delivered to producers and will be supported, 
maintained, updated or revised as necessary. Any proposal where the 
plan does not adequately address each of these issues will not receive 
further consideration. If the plan states that such actions are not 
necessary, the basis for such a determination will be evaluated and the 
proposal reviewed to determine if such determination is reasonable. If 
it is determined that any such actions are required and they are not 
contained in the plan, the proposal will not receive further 
consideration.
    Fourth, all eligible applications will be evaluated using the 
criterion in part V.A.1. Applications must score at least 28 points 
under this criteria in order to be to be evaluated further.
    Fifth, all applications scoring the required 28 points will be 
evaluated further under part V.A.2 through 4.
    For the second and third steps, a review panel will consider all 
applications that are complete and meet the objectives in part I.D. and 
all other requirements in this announcement. If the panel determines 
that an application is eligible to be reviewed under steps four and 
five, the review panel will review the merits of the applications. The 
evaluation of each application will be conducted by a panel of not less 
than three independent reviewers. The panel will be comprised of 
representatives from USDA, other federal agencies, and others 
representing public and private organizations, as needed. The narrative 
and any appendixes provided by each applicant will be used by the 
review panel to evaluate the merits of the project that is being 
proposed for funding. The panel will examine and score applications 
based on the evaluation criteria and weights contained in part V.A.
    In order to be considered for funding, a proposal must score at 
least 75 points.

[[Page 29720]]

    For the last step, those applications meeting the minimum number of 
points will be listed in initial rank order by objective. The highest-
ranking proposal for each objective will be funded in the order of 
priority (the highest ranking proposal meeting objective 1 will be 
funded first and the highest ranking proposal meeting objective 2 will 
be funded second, etc.). It is possible that funds could be exhausted 
before funding projects for every objective. If there are funds 
remaining, the process will be repeated until the funds are obligated. 
The projects selected for funding will be presented, along with funding 
level recommendations, to the Manager of FCIC, who will make the final 
decision on awarding of a partnership agreement.
    If the Manager of FCIC determines that any application is 
sufficiently similar to a project that has been funded or has been 
recommended to be funded under this announcement or any other research 
and development program, then the Manager may elect to not fund that 
application in whole or in part.

VI. Award Administration Information

A. Award Notices

    Receipt of applications will be acknowledged by e-mail, whenever 
possible. Therefore, each applicant is encouraged to provide an e-mail 
address in the application. If an e-mail address is not indicated on an 
application, receipt will be acknowledged by letter. There will be no 
notification of incomplete, unqualified or unfunded applications until 
the awards have been made.
    When received by RMA, applications will be assigned an 
identification number. This number will be communicated to applicants 
in the acknowledgement of receipt of applications. An application 
identification number should be referenced in all correspondence 
regarding the application. If the applicant does not receive an 
acknowledgement within 15 days of the submission deadline, the 
applicant should contact the Research and Development Division at (816) 
926-6343.

B. Administrative and National Policy Requirements

1. Access to Panel Review Information
    Upon written request, scores from the evaluation panel, not 
including the identity of reviewers, will be sent to the applicant 
after the review and awards process has been completed.
2. Notification of Partnership Agreement Awards and Notification of 
Non-Selection
    Following approval of the applications selected for funding, notice 
of project approval and authority to draw down funds will be made to 
the selected applicants in writing. Within the limit of funds available 
for such purpose, the awarding official of RMA shall enter into 
partnership agreements with those applicants whose applications are 
judged to be most meritorious under the procedures set forth in this 
announcement. The partnership agreement provides the amount of Federal 
funds for use in the project period, the terms and conditions of the 
award, and the time period for the project.
    The effective date of the partnership agreement shall be the date 
the agreement is executed by both parties. All funds provided to the 
applicant by FCIC must be expended solely for the purpose for which 
funds are obligated in accordance with the approved application and 
budget, the regulations, the terms and conditions of the award, and the 
applicability of Federal cost principles. No commitment of Federal 
assistance beyond the project period is made or implied, as a result of 
any award made pursuant to this announcement.
    Notification of denial of funding will be sent to applicants after 
final funding decisions have been made. Reasons for denial of funding 
can include incomplete proposals, proposals that did not meet the 
objectives, scored low or were duplicative.
3. Confidential Aspects of Proposals and Awards
    When an application results in a partnership agreement, it becomes 
a part of the official record of RMA transactions, available to the 
public upon specific request. Information that the Secretary of 
Agriculture determines to be of a confidential, privileged, or 
proprietary nature will be held in confidence to the extent permitted 
by law. Therefore, any information that the applicant wishes to be 
considered confidential, privileged, or proprietary should be clearly 
marked within the application, including the basis for such 
designation. The original copy of a proposal that does not result in an 
award will be retained by RMA for a period of one year. Other copies 
will be destroyed. Such a proposal will be released only with the 
express written consent of the applicant or to the extent required by 
law. A proposal may be withdrawn at any time prior to award.
4. Administration
    All partnership agreements are subject to 7 CFR part 3015.
5. Prohibitions and Requirements With Regard to Lobbying
    All partnership agreements are subject to 7 CFR part 3018. A copy 
of the certification and disclosure forms must be submitted with the 
application.
6. Applicable OMB Circulars
    All partnership agreements funded as a result of this notice will 
be subject to the requirements contained in all applicable OMB 
circulars.

C. Reporting

    Applicants awarded a partnership agreement will be required to 
submit quarterly progress and financial reports (SF-269) throughout the 
project period, as well as a final program and financial report not 
later than 90 days after the end of the project period.

VII. Agency Contact

    If applicants have any questions they may contact: USDA, RMA/RED, 
6501 Beacon Drive, Stop 0813, Kansas City, Missouri 64133-4676, or 
phone: (816) 926-6343,or fax: (816) 926-7343,or e-mail: 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#7b29363a293e3f553a0b0b1712181a0f1214153b09161a550e081f1a551c140d"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="1d4f505c4f5859335c6d6d71747e7c697472735d6f707c33686e797c337a726b">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>.

VIII. Other Information

    The names of applicants, the names of individuals identified in the 
applications, the content of applications, and the panel evaluations of 
applications will all be kept confidential, except to those involved in 
the review process, to the extent permitted by law. In addition, the 
identities of review panel members will remain confidential throughout 
the entire review process and will not be released to applicants. At 
the end of the fiscal year, names of panel members will be made 
available. However, panelists will not be identified with the review of 
any particular application.

    Signed in Washington, DC, on May 18, 2005.
Ross J. Davidson, Jr.,
Manager, Federal Crop Insurance Corporation.
[FR Doc. 05-10252 Filed 5-23-05; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3410-08-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>