<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 68 Issue 114 (Friday, June 13, 2003)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 68, Number 114 (Friday, June 13, 2003)]
[Notices]
[Pages 35372-35376]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 03-14954]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Federal Crop Insurance Corporation


Request for Applications (RFA): Risk Management Research 
Partnerships

AGENCY: Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, USDA.

ACTION: Announcement of availability of funds and request for 
application for risk management research partnerships.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In accordance with section 522(d) of the Federal Crop 
Insurance Act (Act), the Federal Crop Insurance Corporation (FCIC) 
announces the availability of approximately $4 million for partnership 
agreements that will fund risk management research activities. Priority 
will be given to those activities addressing the need for risk 
management tools for producers of agricultural commodities currently 
covered by section 196 of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 
U.S.C. 7333), specialty crops, livestock, rangeland and underserved 
commodities (For purposes of this announcement, these commodities are 
collectively referred to as ``Priority Commodities''). Applications 
requesting funding for the specific development or modification of 
insurance products, plans of insurance or policies are excluded from 
consideration under this announcement. Awards under this program will 
be made on a competitive basis for projects of up to three years. 
Recipients of awards must demonstrate non-financial benefits from a 
partnership agreement and must agree to substantial involvement of RMA 
in the project. This announcement lists the information needed to 
submit an application for these funds.
    Closing Date: The closing date and time for receipt of an 
application is 5 p.m. CDT on July 28, 2003. Applications received after 
the deadline will not be evaluated by the technical review panel.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Applicants may download an application 
package from the Risk Management Agency Web site at <a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a>. Applicants may also request an application package 
from: USDA, RMA/ RED, 6501 Beacon Drive, Stop 0813, Kansas City, 
Missouri 64133-4676, phone: (816) 926-6343, fax: (816) 926-7343, e-
mail: <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#f7a5bab6a5b2b3d9b687879b9e9496839e9899b7859a96d982849396d9909881"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="792b34382b3c3d5738090915101a180d101617390b1418570c0a1d18571e160f">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>.
    Applicants are encouraged to submit completed and signed 
application packages using overnight mail or delivery service to ensure 
timely receipt by the USDA. The applicable address for such submissions 
is: RMA/RED Partnership Agreement Program, USDA, RMA/RED, 6501 Beacon 
Drive, Stop 0813, Kansas City, Missouri 64133-4676. Completed and 
signed application packages sent via the U.S. Postal Service must be 
sent to the same address. Applicants using the U.S. Postal Service 
should allow for extra security-processing time for mail delivered to 
government offices.

Paperwork Reduction Act

    Under the provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, as 
amended (44 U.S.C. chapter 25), the collection of information 
requirements contained in this announcement have been approved under 
OMB Document Nos. 0348-0043, 0348-0044, 0348-0046, and 0348-0040.
    The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number for this program 
is 10.450.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This announcement consists of six parts:

Part I--General Information
    A. Legislative Authority
    B. Background
    C. Project Objectives
    D. Purpose
    E. Definition of Priority Commodities
Part II--Eligibility/Funding
    A. Eligible Applicants
    B. Non-financial Benefits
    C. Project Period
    D. Availability of Funds
Part III--Research Program Description
    A. Recipient Activities
    B. RMA Activities
    C. Other Activities
Part IV--Preparation of an Application
    A. Research Program Application Materials
    B. Content of Applications
    C. Submission of Applications
    D. Acknowledgement of Applications
Part V--Review Process
    A. General
    B. Evaluation Criteria and Weights
    C. Confidentiality
Part VI--Additional Information
    A. Access to Panel Review Information
    B. Notification of Partnership Agreement Awards
    C. Confidential Aspects of Proposals and Awards
    D. Reporting Documents
    E. Audit Requirements
    F. Prohibitions and Requirements with Regard to Lobbying
    G. Applicable OMB Circulars

[[Page 35373]]

Part I--General Information

A. Legislative Authority

    This program is authorized under section 522(d) of the Federal Crop 
Insurance Act (Act).

B. Background

    RMA is committed to meeting the risk management needs and improving 
or developing risk management tools for the nation's farmers and 
ranchers. It does this by offering Federal crop insurance and other 
risk management products and tools through a network of private-sector 
entities and by overseeing the creation of new products, seeking 
enhancements in existing products and by expanding the use of a variety 
of risk management tools. Risk management tools are not limited to 
insurance products. Risk management tools include a variety of risk 
management options and strategies developed to assist producers in 
mitigating the risks inherent in agricultural production. Risk 
management tools may include: Financial management tools to mitigate 
price and production risks; tools to enhance measurement and prediction 
of risks in order to facilitate risk diversification; tools to improve 
production management, harvesting, record keeping or marketing. For the 
purposes of this announcement, risk management tools do not include 
insurance products, plans of insurance, policies, modifications thereof 
or any related material.
    Section 552(b) of the Act authorizes RMA to enter into partnerships 
with public and private organizations for the purpose of increasing the 
availability of loss mitigation, financial, and other risk management 
tools for producers with a priority given to risk management tools for 
producers of Priority Commodities as defined in part I.E.

C. Project Objectives

    RMA is only seeking applications that meet the following 
objectives:
    1. To develop risk management tools to assist livestock producers 
in improving techniques for one or more of the following: Planning and 
managing the production of livestock, including disease management and 
control; improving techniques for breeding of livestock; managing 
price, revenue, or production and market risks.
    2. To develop risk management tools to assist forage and rangeland 
producers in improving techniques for one or more of the following: 
Managing production, e.g., optimization of grazing patterns; 
establishing and maintaining forage production records; drought 
mitigation; harvesting or marketing production.
    3. To develop risk management tools to assist organic producers in 
improving techniques for one or more of the following: Assessing market 
risks, including price; marketing of production; and comparing organic 
and conventional production risks.
    4. To clarify labor requirements and assist producers in complying 
with requirements to better meet the physically intense and time-
compressed planting, tending, and harvesting requirements associated 
with the production of specialty crops and underserved agricultural 
commodities.
    5. To develop risk management tools to assist producers in reducing 
the impact of multiple-year losses.
    6. To develop risk management tools to further increase the 
economic and production stability of wild salmon fishermen.

D. Purpose

    The purpose of this program is to fund partnership agreements that 
assist producers, minimize their production risks, and improve and/or 
develop risk management tools for the nation's producers. The 
agreements are for the development of risk management tools for use 
directly by agricultural producers. To aid in meeting these goals each 
partnership agreement awarded through this program will provide the 
recipient with funds, guidance, and the substantial involvement of RMA 
to carry out these risk management initiatives. Applications requesting 
funding for the development of insurance products, plans of insurance, 
policies, modifications thereof or related materials are excluded from 
consideration under this announcement.

E. Definition of Priority Commodities

    For purposes of this program, Priority Commodities are defined as:
    [sbull] Agricultural commodities covered by (7 U.S.C. 7333). 
Commodities in this group are commercial crops that are not covered by 
catastrophic risk protection crop insurance, are used for food or fiber 
(except livestock), and specifically include, but are not limited to, 
floricultural, ornamental nursery, Christmas trees, turf grass sod, 
aquaculture (including ornamental fish), and industrial crops.
    [sbull] Specialty crops. Commodities in this group may or may not 
be covered under a Federal crop insurance plan and include, but are not 
limited to, fruits, vegetables, tree nuts, syrups, honey, roots, herbs, 
and highly specialized varieties of traditional crops.
    [sbull] Underserved commodities. This group includes: (a) 
commodities, including livestock, that are covered by a Federal crop 
insurance plan but for which participation in an area is below the 
national average; and (b) commodities, including livestock, with 
inadequate crop insurance coverage.

Part II--Eligibility/Funding

A. Eligible Applicants

    Proposals are invited from qualified public and private entities. 
Eligible applicants include all colleges and universities, Federal, 
State, and local agencies, nonprofit and for-profit private 
organizations or corporations, and other entities. Individuals are not 
eligible applicants. Although an applicant may be eligible to compete 
for an award based on its status as an eligible entity, other factors 
may exclude an applicant from receiving Federal assistance under this 
program (e.g., debarment and suspension; a determination of non-
performance on a prior contract, cooperative agreement, grant or 
partnership; a determination of a violation of applicable ethical 
standards).

B. Non-Financial Benefits

    Applicants must be able to demonstrate they will receive non-
financial benefits as a result of the partnership agreement. Non-
financial benefits must accrue to the applicant and must include more 
than the ability to provide employment income to the applicant or for 
the applicant's employees or the community. The applicant must 
demonstrate that performance under the partnership agreement will 
further the specific mission of the applicant (such as providing 
research or activities necessary for graduate or other students to 
complete educational programs).

C. Project Period

    Each project will be funded for a period of up to three years for 
the activities described in this announcement. Projects can also be in 
two parts with the first part including the research and feasibility 
studies and the second part including the development, implementation, 
delivery and maintenance of the risk management tool. If the 
development of the tool is determined not to be feasible, the 
partnership may be terminated by RMA after completion of the first part 
with funding reduced accordingly.

D. Availability of Funds

    Approximately $4,000,000 is available in FY2003 to fund partnership 
agreements. There is no commitment by USDA/RMA to fund any particular 
project or to make a specific number of awards. Applicants awarded a

[[Page 35374]]

partnership agreement for an amount that is less than the amount 
requested will be required to modify their application to conform to 
the reduced amount before execution of the partnership agreement. No 
maximum or minimum funding levels have been established for individual 
projects. It is expected that the awards will begin to be made on or 
about September 11, 2003. All awards will be made and agreements 
completed no later than September 30, 2003.
    Partnership agreement funds may not be used to:
    1. Plan, repair, rehabilitate, acquire, or construct a building or 
facility including a processing facility;
    2. To purchase, rent, or install fixed equipment;
    3. Repair or maintain privately owned vehicles;
    4. Pay for the preparation of the partnership application;
    5. Fund political activities;
    6. Pay costs incurred prior to receiving this partnership 
agreement;
    7. Fund any activities prohibited in 7 CFR parts 3015 and 3019, as 
applicable.

Part III--Research Program Description

    In conducting activities to achieve the purpose of this proposed 
research, the recipient will be responsible for the activities listed 
under paragraph A of this part. RMA will be responsible for the 
activities listed under paragraph B of this part.

A. Recipient Activities

    The applicant will be required to perform the following activities:
    1. Finalize, in cooperation with RMA, the partnership agreement.
    2. Define non-financial benefits and the substantial involvement of 
the RMA.
    3. Coordinate, manage, document and implement the timely completion 
of the approved research and development activities.
    4. Abide by the plans and provisions contained in the partnership 
agreement.
    5. Report on program performance in accordance with OMB Circular A-
102 and A-110.
    6. The recipient may be required to make a presentation to the FCIC 
Board of Directors.
    7. Adhere to RMA guidelines for systems development and information 
technology development.
    8. In cooperation with RMA, determine the feasibility and if 
necessary collaborate in the development of a plan to administer, 
maintain, and update the risk management tool in the future.

B. RMA Activities

    1. Collaborate on the research plan;
    2. Advise the recipient on the materials available over the 
internet and through the RMA Web site (<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a>) and be 
involved in the gathering of any additional information that may be 
required;
    3. Work with the recipient in all phases of the research and 
development of the risk management tool, and the educational efforts to 
enable producers to utilize the risk management tool; and
    4. Collaborate with the recipient in the development of all 
materials associated with the research and development program as it 
relates to publication or presentation of the results and the risk 
management tools to the public, any producer groups, RMA, and the FCIC 
Board of Directors.
    5. Collaborate with the recipient in the development of a proposal 
to administer, maintain and update the risk management tool in the 
future.

C. Other Activities

    In addition to the specific activities listed above, the applicant 
may suggest other activities that would contribute directly to the 
purpose of this program. For any additional activity suggested, the 
applicant should identify the objective of the activity, the specific 
tasks required to meet the objective, specific time lines for 
performing the tasks, and specific responsibilities of the partners. 
For any additional activity suggested, the applicant should identify 
specific ways in which RMA could or should have substantial involvement 
in that activity.

Part IV--Preparation of an Application

A. Research Program Application Materials

    Applicant may download an application package from the Risk 
Management Agency Web site at: <a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a>. Applicants may 
also request an application package from: David W. Fulk, USDA, RMA/RED, 
6501 Beacon Drive, Stop 0813, Kansas City, Missouri 64133-4676, phone: 
(816) 926-6343, fax: (816) 926-7343, e-mail: <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#8cdec1cddec9c8d3cdfcfce0e5efedf8e5e3e2ccfee1eda2f9ffe8eda2ebe3fa"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="94c6d9d5c6d1d0cbd5e4e4f8fdf7f5e0fdfbfad4e6f9f5bae1e7f0f5baf3fbe2">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>.

B. Content of Applications

    A complete and valid application package must include an original, 
two paper copies, and one electronic copy (Microsoft Word format 
preferred) of the application package on diskette or compact disc, and:
    1. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424, ``Application for 
Federal Assistance''.
    2. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424-A, ``Budget 
Information--Non-construction Programs''. Reviewers will need 
sufficient information to effectively evaluate the budget. Indirect 
cost for projects submitted in response to this solicitation are 
limited to 10 percent of the total direct cost of the agreement. A 
sample budget narrative, including suggestions for format and content, 
is available on the RMA Web site (<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a>) or upon 
request.
    3. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424-B--``Assurances, 
Non-construction Programs''.
    4. Any narrative submitted with the application package should be 
limited to 10 single-sided pages. Reviewers will need sufficient 
information to effectively evaluate the application under the criteria 
contained in part V.B. A sample narrative, including suggestions for 
format and content, is available on the RMA Web site (<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a>) or upon request.
    5. An appendix containing any attachments that may support 
information in the narrative (Optional).
    6. A statement of the non-financial benefits of any partnership 
agreement to the recipient. (Refer to Part II.B ``Non-financial 
Benefits'').
    7. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form LLL, ``Disclosure of 
Lobbying Activities.''
    8. A completed and signed AD-1047, ``Certification Regarding 
Debarment, Suspension and Other Responsibility Matters (Primary Covered 
Transactions.'')
    9. A completed and signed AD-1049, ``Certification Regarding Drug-
Free Workplace.'' Applicants are responsible for ensuring the 
application materials are received by the closing date. Incomplete 
application packages will not receive further consideration.

C. Submission of Applications

    1. An original and two paper copies of the completed and signed 
application, and one electronic copy (Microsoft Word format preferred) 
on diskette or compact disc must be submitted in one package at the 
time of initial submission.
    2. All applications must be submitted and received by the deadline. 
Applications that do not meet all of the requirements in this 
announcement are considered incomplete applications. Late or incomplete 
applications will not be considered in this competition and will be 
returned to the applicant.
    3. Applicants submitted through express, overnight mail or another 
delivery service will be considered as meeting the announced deadline 
if they are received in the mailroom at the address stated above for 
express, overnight mail or another delivery

[[Page 35375]]

service on or before the deadline. Applicants are cautioned that 
express, overnight mail or other delivery services do not always 
deliver as agreed. Applicants should take this into account because 
failure of such delivery services will not extend the deadline. The 
address must appear on the envelope or package containing the 
application with the note ``Attention: RMA/RED Partnership 
Application.''
    Mailed applications will be considered meeting the announced 
deadline if they are received on or before the deadline in the mailroom 
at the address stated above for mailed applications. Applicants are 
responsible for mailing applications well in advance, to ensure that 
applications are received on or before the deadline time and date. 
Applicants using the U.S. Postal Service should allow for the extra 
time for delivery due to the additional security measures that mail 
delivered to government offices in the Washington, DC area now 
requires.
    4. RMA cannot accommodate transmissions of applications by 
facsimile or through other electronic media. Therefore, applications 
transmitted electronically will not be accepted regardless of the date 
or time of submission or the time of receipt.
    5. The deadline for receipt of an application is 5 p.m. Central 
Daylight Time on July 28, 2003. The application deadline is firm as to 
date and hour and applies to submission of the original application and 
two copies.

D. Acknowledgement of Applications

    Receipt of applications will be acknowledged by e-mail, whenever 
possible. Therefore, each applicant is encouraged to provide an e-mail 
address in the application. If an e-mail address is not indicated on an 
application, receipt will be acknowledged by letter. There will be no 
notification of incomplete, unqualified or unfunded applications until 
the awards have been made.
    When received by RMA, applications will be assigned an 
identification number. This number will be communicated to applicants 
in the acknowledgement of receipt of applications. An application 
identification number should be referenced in all correspondence 
regarding the application. If the applicant does not receive an 
acknowledgement within 15 days of the submission deadline, the 
applicant should contact David Fulk at (816) 926-6343.

Part V--Review Process

A. General

    Each application will be evaluated using a two-part process. First, 
each application will be screened by RMA personnel to ensure that it 
meets the objectives stated in part I.C and part IV. Applications that 
do not meet the objectives stated in part I.C and all other 
requirements in this announcement or are incomplete will not receive 
further consideration.
    Second, a review panel will consider the merits of all applications 
that are complete and meet the objectives in part I.C and all other 
requirements in this announcement. The evaluation of each application 
will be conducted by a panel of not less than three independent 
reviewers. The panel will be comprised of representatives from USDA, 
other federal agencies, and others representing public and private 
organizations, as needed. The narrative and any appendixes provided by 
each applicant will be used by the review panel to evaluate the merits 
of the project that is being proposed for funding. The panel will 
examine and score applications based on the ``Evaluation Criteria and 
Weights'' contained in this paragraph B of this part.
    All eligible applications will be evaluated using the criteria in 
part V.B.1. Applications must score at least 32 points under these 
criteria in order to be to be evaluated further. All applications 
scoring the required 32 points will be evaluated further under part 
V.B.2 through 5. After assigning points upon those criteria, 
applications will be listed in initial rank order and presented, along 
with funding level recommendations, to the Manager of FCIC, who will 
make the final decision on awarding of a partnership agreement. 
However, if the Manager of FCIC determines that any lower rated 
application is sufficiently similar to a project that has been funded 
or has been recommended to be funded under this announcement or any 
other research and development program, then the Manager may elect to 
not fund that application in whole or in part.

B. Evaluation Criteria and Weights

1. Research Objectives--Maximum 40 points
    The application must receive a minimum score of 32 points under 
this criterion in order to be considered for further evaluation and 
funding. Applications receiving less than 32 points will be eliminated 
and will not be evaluated under criteria 2 through 5.
    The proposal clearly defines the development, management and 
implementation of a risk management tool designed to meet the needs of 
the producers outlined in the objectives in part I.C. Proposals that 
best meet the objectives in part 1.C and are innovative, clear, 
concise, useful and easy to understand will be given the highest score.
2. Indication of RMA Involvement and Non-financial Benefits--Maximum 10 
points
    The proposal clearly indicates areas of substantial involvement by 
RMA and clearly indicates benefits derived from the partnership that 
extends beyond the financial benefits or funding of the research 
proposal. Those proposals that clearly outline the involvement of RMA 
in all aspects of the project and demonstrate non-financial benefit 
will receive the highest score. Examples of non-financial benefits 
would be the benefits derived by an educational institution by 
providing research opportunities to students or benefits derived 
through the furtherance of an organization's mission.
3. Research Approach, Methodology, Development and Implementation--
Maximum 40 points
    The proposal clearly demonstrates a sound research approach and 
defines the methodology to be used as well as describes the development 
and implementation of the risk management tool. Proposals that 
demonstrate a clear, concise and generally accepted research 
methodology and innovative approach will receive the highest number of 
points.
4. Management--Maximum 10 points
    The proposal clearly demonstrates the applicant's ability and 
resources to coordinate and manage all aspects of the proposed research 
project. The applicant whose approach is the most cost effective and 
optimizes the use and effective application of the funding will receive 
the highest score.
5. Bonus Points--Maximum 35 points
    Because sections 522(d) and 523 of the Act require RMA to give 
priority for risk management tools for specific producers or 
commodities, 15 bonus points are available for proposals that meet one 
or more of these priorities. The priorities are for projects that cover 
the Priority Commodities (defined in part I.E), and wild salmon.
    Due to the administrative burden of administering these 
partnerships, the substantial involvement required and RMA's limited 
resources, 20 bonus

[[Page 35376]]

points are available for proposals that have geographic diversity. 
Geographic diversity means multiple states or regions as defined by the 
National Agricultural Statistics Service and have the broadest number 
of producers impacted.

C. Confidentiality

    The names of applicants, the names of individuals identified in the 
applications, the content of applications, and the panel evaluations of 
applications will all be kept confidential, except to those involved in 
the review process, to the extent permitted by law. In addition, the 
identities of review panel members will remain confidential throughout 
the entire review process and will not be released to applicants. At 
the end of the fiscal year, names of panel members will be made 
available. However, panelists will not be identified with the review of 
any particular application.

Part VI--Additional Information

A. Access to Panel Review Information

    Upon written request, scores from the evaluation panel, not 
including the identity of reviewers, will be sent to the applicant 
after the review and awards process has been completed.

B. Notification of Partnership Agreement Awards and Notification of 
Non-Selection

    Following approval of the applications selected for funding, notice 
of project approval and authority to draw down funds will be made to 
the selected applicants in writing. Within the limit of funds available 
for such purpose, the awarding official of RMA shall enter into 
partnership agreements with those applicants whose applications are 
judged to be most meritorious under the procedures set forth in this 
announcement. The partnership agreement provides the amount of Federal 
funds for use in the project period, the terms and conditions of the 
award, and the time period for the project.
    The effective date of the partnership agreement shall be the date 
the agreement is executed by both parties. All funds provided to the 
applicant by FCIC must be expended solely for the purpose for which 
funds are obligated in accordance with the approved application and 
budget, the regulations, the terms and conditions of the award, and the 
applicability of Federal cost principles. No commitment of Federal 
assistance beyond the project period is made or implied, as a result of 
any award made pursuant to this announcement.
    Notification of denial of funding will be sent to applicants after 
final funding decisions have been made. Reasons for denial of funding 
can include incomplete proposals, proposals that did not meet the 
objectives, scored low or were duplicative.

C. Confidential Aspects of Proposals and Awards

    When an application results in a partnership agreement, it becomes 
a part of the official record of RMA transactions, available to the 
public upon specific request. Information that the Secretary of 
Agriculture determines to be of a confidential, privileged, or 
proprietary nature will be held in confidence to the extent permitted 
by law. Therefore, any information that the applicant wishes to be 
considered confidential, privileged, or proprietary should be clearly 
marked within the application, including the basis for such 
designation. The original copy of a proposal that does not result in an 
award will be retained by RMA for a period of one year. Other copies 
will be destroyed. Such a proposal will be released only with the 
express written consent of the applicant or to the extent required by 
law. A proposal may be withdrawn at any time prior to award.

D. Reporting Document

    Applicants awarded a partnership agreement will be required to 
submit monthly progress and financial reports (SF-269) throughout the 
project period, as well as a final program and financial report not 
later than 90 days after the end of the project period.

E. Audit Requirements

    Applicants awarded the partnership agreements are subject to audit.

F. Prohibitions and Requirements With Regard to Lobbying

    Section 1352 of Public Law 101-121, enacted on October 23, 1989, 
imposes prohibitions and requirements for disclosure and certification 
related to lobbying on recipients of Federal contracts, grants, 
cooperative agreements, and loans. It provides exemptions for Indian 
Tribes and tribal organizations. Current and prospective recipients, 
and any subcontractors, are prohibited from using Federal funds, other 
than profits from a Federal contract, for lobbying Congress or any 
Federal agency in connection with the award of a contract, grant, 
cooperative agreement, or loan. In addition, for each award action in 
excess of $100,000 ($150,000 for loans) the law requires recipients and 
any subcontractors (1) to certify that they have neither used nor will 
use any appropriated funds for payments of lobbyists; (2) to disclose 
the name, address, payment details, and purpose of any agreements with 
lobbyists whom recipients or subcontractors will pay with profit or 
other nonappropriated funds on or after December 22, 1989; (3) to file 
quarterly updates about the use of lobbyists if material changes occur 
in their use. The law establishes civil penalties for non-compliance. A 
copy of the certification and disclosure forms must be submitted with 
the application and are available from David Fulk at the above stated 
address and telephone number.

G. Applicable OMB Circulars

    All partnership and cooperative agreements funded as a result of 
this notice will be subject to the requirements contained in all 
applicable OMB circulars.

    Signed in Washington, DC, on May 10, 2003.
Ross J. Davidson, Jr.,
Manager, Federal Crop Insurance Corporation.
[FR Doc. 03-14954 Filed 6-12-03; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3410-08-M


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>