<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 68 Issue 114 (Friday, June 13, 2003)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 68, Number 114 (Friday, June 13, 2003)]
[Notices]
[Pages 35363-35372]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 03-14955]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Federal Crop Insurance Corporation


Request for Applications (RFA): Risk Management and Crop 
Insurance Education

AGENCY: Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, USDA.

ACTION: Announcement of availability of funds and request for 
applications under two programs--(1) Commodity Partnerships for Risk 
Management Education and (2) Crop Insurance Education in Targeted 
States.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In accordance with sections 552(d) and 524(a) of the Federal 
Crop Insurance Act (Act), the Federal Crop Insurance Corporation 
(FCIC), operating through the Risk Management Agency (RMA), announces 
the availability of funding for two educational and informational 
programs:
    1. Commodity Partnerships for Risk Management Education (Commodity 
Partnerships program). FCIC announces the availability of up to $3.5 
million for partnership agreements for risk management training and 
informational activities, with a priority for reaching agricultural 
producers of (a) agricultural commodities covered by section 196 of the 
Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 U.S.C. 7333); (b) specialty 
crops; and (c) underserved commodities. (For purposes of these 
announcements, these commodities are collectively referred to as 
``Priority Commodities.'') A maximum of thirty-nine partnership 
agreements will be funded: One in each of thirty-five specific States, 
one in Puerto Rico, and one in each of three multi-state areas. 
Recipients of awards must demonstrate non-financial benefits from a 
partnership agreement and must agree to the substantial involvement of 
RMA in the project.
    2. Crop Insurance Education in Targeted States (Targets States 
program). FCIC announces the availability of up to $4.25 million for 
cooperative agreements that will be used to conduct crop insurance 
education and information programs in fifteen States that have been 
determined to have low participation or are underserved by the Federal 
crop insurance program. The fifteen States are Connecticut, Delaware, 
Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New 
York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Utah, Vermont, West Virginia, and 
Wyoming. Funding will be limited for each of the fifteen States and a 
maximum of one cooperative agreement will be funded for each State. 
Recipients of awards must agree to the substantial involvement of RMA 
in the project.
    Awards under both of these programs will be made on a competitive 
basis for projects of up to one year. This announcement lists the 
information needed to submit an application under either of these 
programs.

Closing Dates: The closing date and time for receipt of applications 
for both programs is 5 p.m. EDT on July 28, 2003. Applications received 
after the deadline will not be evaluated by the technical review panel.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Applicants and other interested 
parties are encouraged to contact: Michelle Fuller, USDA-RMA-RME, 1400 
Independence Ave. SW., Stop 0808, (Portals Bldg., Suite 508), 
Washington, DC 20250-0808, phone: 202-720-6356, fax: 202-690-3605, e-
mail: <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#5e33373d363b32323b70382b32323b2c1e293a3d702b2d3a3f70393128"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="84e9ede7ece1e8e8e1aae2f1e8e8e1f6c4f3e0e7aaf1f7e0e5aae3ebf2">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>. You may also obtain information 
regarding this announcement from the RMA website at: <a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a> gov.
    Applicants may download an application package for either of the 
two programs from the RMA Web site at: <a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a>. 
Applicants may also request an application package from: Michelle 
Fuller, USDA-RMA-RME, 1400 Independence Ave. SW., Stop 0808, (Portals 
Bldgs., Suite 508), Washington, DC 20250-0808, phone: 202-720-6356, 
fax: 202-690-3605, email:<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#54393d373c313838317a322138383126142330377a212730357a333b22"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="c6abafa5aea3aaaaa3e8a0b3aaaaa3b486b1a2a5e8b3b5a2a7e8a1a9b0">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>. 
<mailto:<a href="mailto:michelle.fuller@wdc.usda.gov"><a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection" class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="d3bebab0bbb6bfbfb6fdb5a6bfbfb6a193a4b7b0fda6a0b7b2fdb4bca5">[email&#160;protected]</a></a>.<ls-thn-eq>
    Applicants are strongly encouraged to submit completed and signed 
application packages using overnight mail or delivery service to ensure 
timely receipt by the USDA. The applicable address for such submissions 
is: RME Agreement Programs, c/o Michelle Fuller, USDA-RMA-RME, 1250 
Maryland Ave. SW., Suite 508, Washington, DC 20024.
    Completed and signed application packages sent via the U.S. Postal 
Service must be sent to the following address: RME Agreement Programs, 
c/o Michelle Fuller, USDA-RMA-RME, 1400 Independence Ave. SW., Stop 
0808, (Portals Bldg. Suite 508), Washington, DC 20250-0808. Applicants 
using the U.S. Postal Service should allow for extra security-
processing time for mail delivered to government offices.

Paperwork Reduction Act

    Under the provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, as 
amended (44 U.S.C. chapter 25), the collection of information 
requirements contained in this announcement have been approved under 
OMB Document Nos. 0348-0043, 0348-0044, 0348-0046, and 0348-0040.

[[Page 35364]]

    The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number for these 
programs is 10.450.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This announcement consists of five parts:

Part I--Information for the Commodity Partnerships Program

A. General Information
    1. Legislative Authority
    2. Background
    3. Project Goal
    4. Purpose
    5. Definition of Priority Commodities
B. Eligibility/Funding
    1. Eligible Applicants
    2. Non-financial Benefits
    3. Project Period
    4. Availability of Funds and Amounts
C. Program Description
    1. Recipient Activities
    2. RMA Activities
    3. Other Activities

Part II--Information for the Targeted States Program

A. General Information
    1. Legislative Authority
    2. Background
    3. Project Goal
    4. Purpose
B. Eligibility/Funding
    1. Eligible Applicants
    2. Project Period
    3, Availability of Funds and Amounts
C. Program Description
    1. Recipient Activities
    2. RMA Activities
    3. Other Activities

Part III--Preparation of an Application

A. Program Application Materials
B. Content of Applications
C. Submission of Applications
D. Acknowledgment of Applications

Part IV--Review Process

A. General
B. Evaluation Criteria and Weights
C. Confidentiality

Part V--Additional Information

A. Requirement to Use Program Logo
B. Requirement to Provide Project Information to an RMA-selected 
Contractor
C. Private Crop Insurance Organizations and Potential Conflicts of 
Interest
D. Access to Panel Review Information
E. Notification of Cooperative Agreement Awards
F. Confidential Aspects of Proposals and Awards
G. Reporting Requirements
H. Audit Requirements
I. Prohibitions and Requirements with Regarding to Lobbying
J. Applicable OMB Circulars

Part I--Information for the Commodity Partnership Program

A. General Information

1. Legislative Authority
    The Commodity Partnership program is authorized under section 
552(d)(3)(F) of the Federal Crop Insurance Act (Act).
2. Background
    RMA promotes and regulates sound risk management solutions to 
improve the economic stability of American agriculture. On behalf of 
FCIC, RMA does this by offering Federal crop insurance products through 
a network of private-sector partners, overseeing the creation of new 
risk management products, seeking enhancement in existing products, 
ensuring the integrity of crop insurance programs, offering outreach 
programs aimed at equal access and participation of underserved 
communities, and providing risk management education and information.
    One of RMA's four strategic goals is to ensure that its customers 
are well informed as to the risk management solutions available. This 
educational goal is supported by section 522(d)(3)(F) of the Act, which 
authorizes FCIC funding for risk management training and informational 
efforts for agricultural producers through the formation of 
partnerships with public and private organizations. With respect to 
such partnerships, a priority is to be given to producers of Priority 
Commodities (as specified in subsection 5 of this section).
3. Project Goal
    The goal of this program is to ensure that ``* * * producers will 
be better able to use financial management, crop insurance, marketing 
contracts, and other existing and emerging risk management tools.''
4. Purpose
    The purpose of this program is to provide U.S. farmers and ranchers 
(with an emphasis on producers of Priority Commodities) with training 
and informational opportunities to be able to understand:
    [sbull] The kinds of risks addressed by existing and emerging risk 
management tools;
    [sbull] The features and appropriate use of existing and emerging 
risk management tools; and
    [sbull] How to make sound risk management decisions.
    Each partnership agreement awarded through this program will 
provide the applicant with funds, guidance, and the substantial 
involvement of RMA to carry out a risk management education and 
information program for producers in a specific geographical area. RMA 
envisions that most of the training and informational activitiers under 
these partnership agreements will be conducted during the November 2003 
through March 2004 period, which will be the best time to reach 
producers with educational programs in most areas. However, activities 
are not restricted to this time period because certain groups of 
producers might benefit from a different schedule of educational 
activities. RMA anticipates that project leaders will have sufficient 
time to organize and schedule events, commit funds to reserve event 
facilities, gather materials, raise awareness, and otherwise make the 
preparations needed to ensure good producer participation in all 
planned educational activities. Most of all, RMA anticipates that 
project leaders will prepare by fostering the cooperation and active 
support of organizations with close ties to local producers. Support 
from such organizations is essential in influencing local producers to 
participate in the type of activities envisioned in this educational 
program. A maximum of thirty-nine partnership agreements will be 
awarded: One each in thirty-five specific States and one in Puerto Rico 
(collectively referred to as the ``States''), and one each in three 
multi-state areas (referred to as the ``area''). A maximum amount of 
funding will be available for each of the States and area. The specific 
States and areas are identified in part I.B.4.
    Projects funded through this program are envisioned to include the 
participation of multiple and diverse partners within the specific 
States and areas. Partners should include public and private 
agricultural organizations in the State or area with a state in 
ensuring that agricultural producers have increased knowledge and skill 
in dealing with production, price, and financial risk. RMA specifically 
encourages applicants to address the needs of beginning farmers and 
ranchers as an important element of the project. Over the past year, 
livestock and forage producers and livestock producers who use 
rangeland in certain regions of the U.S. have suffered unusually large 
financial losses from the effects of prolonged drought. These producers 
are in special need of education and information on the programs, 
tools, and risk management strategies that will assist them in dealing 
with drought. Therefore, RMA is specifically seeking projects for these 
producers in the States of Montana, South Dakota, Arizona, Multi-state 
Area 1 (Utah, Nevada, and

[[Page 35365]]

Wyoming), New Mexico, Texas, Idaho, Oregon, Colorado, Louisiana, and 
Nebraska. The selection of these States and areas was based on those 
States and area experiencing severe, extreme, or exceptional drought 
over a significant area, as identified by the U.S. Drought Monitor of 
June 3, 2003. Consequently, projects directed to producers of livestock 
and forage and livestock producers who use rangeland with respect to 
drought risk mitigation in the above States and areas will be awarded 
bonus points in the evaluation process. Details are provided in part 
IV.B.5.
5. Definition of Priority Commodities
    For purposes of this program, Priority Commodities are defined as:
     Agricultural commodities covered by (7 U.S.C. 7333). Commodities 
in this group are commercial crops that are not covered by catastrophic 
risk protection crop insurance, are used for food or fiber (except 
livestock), and specifically include, but are not limited to, 
floricultural, ornamental nursery, Christmas trees, turf grass sod, 
aquaculture (including ornamental fish), and industrial crops.
    Specialty crops. Commodities in this group may or may not be 
covered under a Federal crop insurance plan and include, but are not 
limited to, fruits, vegetables, tree nuts, syrups, honey, roots, herbs, 
and highly specialized varities of traditioinal crops.
    Underserved commodities. This group includes: (a) Commodities 
including livestock and forage, that are covered by a Federal crop 
insurance plan but for which participation in an area is below the 
national average; and (b) commodities, including livestock, with 
inadequate crop insurance coverage.

A project is considered as giving priority to Priority Commodities if 
the majority of the educational activities of the project are directed 
to producers of any of the three classes of commodities listed above or 
any combination of the three classes.

B. Eligibility/Funding

1. Eligible Applicants
    Eligible applicants include State departments of agriculture, 
universities, non-profit agricultural organizations, and other public 
or private organizations with the capacity to lead a local program of 
risk management education for farmers and ranchers in a specific State 
or area. Individuals are not eligible applicants. Applicants may apply 
to deliver education in more than one State or area, but a separate 
application must be submitted for each State or area.
    Although an applicant may be eligible to compete for an award based 
on its status as an eligible entity, other factors may exclude an 
applicant from receiving Federal assistance under this program (e.g., 
debarment and suspension; a determination of non-performance on a prior 
contract, cooperative agreement, grant or partnership; a determination 
of a violation of applicable ethical standards).
2. Non-Financial Benefits
    To be eligible, applicants must also be able to demonstrate that 
they will receive a non-financial benefit as a result of a partnership 
agreement. Non-financial benefits must accrue to the applicant and must 
include more than the ability to provide employment income to the 
applicant or for the applicant's employees or the community. The 
applicant must demonstrate that performance under the partnership 
agreement will further the specific mission of the applicant (such as 
providing research or activities necessary for graduate or other 
students to complete their educational program).
3. Project Period
    Each project will be funded for a period of up to one year from the 
project starting date for the activities described in this 
announcement.
4. Availability of Funds and Amounts
    Up to $3,500,000 is available in fiscal year 2003 to fund up to 39 
partnership agreements. A maximum of one agreement will be funded for 
each of 35 specific States, Puerto Rico, and three multi-state areas. 
It is expected that the awards will be made approximately 60 days after 
the application deadline. All awards will be made and agreements 
approved and signed no later than September 30, 2003.
    Partnership or cooperative agreement funds may not be used to:
    a. Plan, repair, rehabilitate, acquire, or construct a building or 
facility including a processing facility;
    b. To purchase, rent, or install fixed equipment;
    c. Repair or maintain privately owned vehicles;
    d. Pay for the preparation of the partnership or cooperative 
agreement application;
    e. Fund political activities;
    f. Pay costs incurred prior to receiving a partnership or 
cooperative agreement;
    g. Fund any activities prohibited in 7 CFR Parts 3015 and 3019, as 
applicable.
    The approximate funding amount available for each State, Puerto 
Rico, and multi-state area, along with the RMA Regional Office assigned 
to those States or areas for purposes of providing substantial 
involvement, is as follows:


Billings, MT Regional Office:
  Montana..................................................      $45,000
  North Dakota.............................................       50,000
  South Dakota.............................................       57,000
Davis, CA Regional Officer:
  Arizona..................................................       57,000
  California...............................................      356,000
  Hawaii...................................................       37,000
  Multi-state Area 1* (UT, NV, WY).........................      118,000
Jackson, MS Regional Office:
  Arkansas.................................................       83,000
  Kentucky.................................................       61,000
  Louisiana................................................       47,000
  Mississippi..............................................       63,000
  Tennessee................................................       49,000
Oklahoma City, OK Regional Office:
  New Mexico...............................................       55,000
  Oklahoma.................................................       77,000
  Texas....................................................      177,000
Raleigh, NC Regional Office:
  North Carolina...........................................      103,000
  Virginia.................................................       56,000
  Multi-state Area 2 (ME, NH, VT, CT, RI, MA, NY)..........      279,000
  Multi-state Area 3 (PA, NJ, DE, MD, WV)..................      245,000
Spokane, WA Regional Office:
  Alaska...................................................       31,000
  Idaho....................................................       67,000
  Oregon...................................................       70,000
  Washington...............................................       92,000
Springfield, IL Regional Office:
  Illinois.................................................       53,000
  Indiana..................................................       56,000
  Michigan.................................................       64,000
  Ohio.....................................................       68,000
St. Paul, MN Regional Office:
  Iowa.....................................................       92,000
  Minnesota................................................       79,000
  Wisconsin................................................       93,000
Topeka, KS Regional Office:
  Colorado.................................................       81,000
  Kansas...................................................      101,000
  Missouri.................................................       69,000
  Nebraska.................................................      106,000
Valdosta, GA Regional Office:
  Alabama..................................................       73,000
  Florida..................................................      126,000
  Georgia..................................................       89,000
  Puerto Rico..............................................       30,000
  South Carolina...........................................       45,000
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................  $3,500,000
 
* The partnership agreement for Multi-state area 1 will also be
  supported with substantial involvement from RMA's Billings, MT
  Regional Office.


    The funding amount for each State and area was determined by first 
allocating $30,000 to each State and Puerto Rico, for a total of 
$1,530,000. The amount remaining from the $3,500,000 available for this 
program ($1,970,000) was then allocated pro rata to each State's share 
of cash receipts for Priority Commodities. Receipts for Priority 
Commodities were estimated by

[[Page 35366]]

subtracting major program crop receipts from total agricultural 
receipts for each State using 1999 data.
    In the event that additional funds become available under this 
program or in the event that no application for a given State or area 
is recommended for funding by the evaluation panel, these additional 
funds may, at the discretion of the Manger of FCIC, be allocated pro-
rata to State or area award recipients by mutual consent for use in 
broadening the size or scope of awarded projects or may be used to fund 
more than one project in a State or area.
    In the event that the Manager of FCIC determines that available RMA 
resources cannot support the administrative and substantial involvement 
requirements of all agreements recommended for funding, the Manager may 
elect to fund fewer agreements than the available funding might 
otherwise allow.

C. Program Description

    In conducting activities to achieve the purpose and goal of this 
program in a specific State or area, the award recipient will be 
responsible for the activities listed under paragraph 1 of this part. 
FCIC, working through RMA, will be substantially involved in each 
project through one of RMA's ten Regional Offices and will be 
specifically responsible for the activities listed under paragraph 2.
1. Recipient Activities
    Award recipients will be required to perform the following 
activities:
    [sbull] Finalize a risk management education delivery plan that 
will accomplish the purpose of this program in the designated State or 
area. The plan must describe the manner in which various tasks for the 
project will be completed, the dates by which each task will be 
completed, and the partners that will have responsibility for each 
task. Task milestones must be listed so as to ensure that progress can 
be measured at various stages throughout the life of the project. The 
plan must also provide for the substantial involvement of RMA in the 
project. (Note: All partnership agreements resulting from this 
announcement will include delivery plans prepared in a specific table 
format. All applicants are strongly encouraged to refer to this table 
format when preparing a delivery plan as part of the application 
narrative. Copies of the table format are available from the RMA Web 
site [<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">www.rma.usda.gov</a>] or upon request).
    [sbull] Assemble risk management instructional materials 
appropriate for producers in the State or area to be used in delivering 
education and information. This will include: (a) Gathering existing 
instructional materials that meet the local needs of agricultural 
producers of agricultural commodities; (b) identifying gaps in existing 
instructional materials; and (c) developing new materials or modifying 
existing instructional materials to fill existing gaps.
    [sbull] Develop and conduct a promotional program. This program 
will include activities using media, newsletters, publications, or 
other informational dissemination techniques that are designed to: (a) 
Raise awareness for risk management; (b) inform producers of the 
availability of risk management tools; and (c) inform producers in the 
State or area of the training and informational opportunities being 
offered.
    [sbull] Deliver risk management training and informational 
opportunities to agricultural producers and agribusiness professionals. 
This will include organizing and delivering educational activities 
using the instructional materials identified earlier. Activities should 
be directed primarily to agricultural producers, but may include those 
agribusiness professionals that have frequent opportunities to advise 
farmers on risk management in the State or area.
    [sbull] Document all educational activities conducted under the 
partnership agreement and the results of such activities, including 
criteria and indicators used to evaluate the success of the program. 
The recipient will also be required to provide information to an RMA-
selected contractor to evaluate all educational activities and advise 
RMA as to the effectiveness of activities.
2. RMA Activities
    RMA will be responsible for the following activities:
    [sbull] Review and approve in advance the recipient's project 
delivery plan.
    [sbull] Collaborate with the recipient in assembling risk 
management materials for producers. This will include: (a) Reviewing 
and approving in advance all educational materials for technical 
accuracy; (b) serving on curriculum development workgroups; (c) 
providing curriculum developers with fact sheets and other risk 
management publications that have been prepared by RMA; (d) advising 
the applicant on the materials available over the internet through the 
AgRisk Education Library; (e) advising the applicant on technical 
issues related to crop insurance instructional materials; and (f) 
advising the applicant on the use of the standardized design and layout 
formats to be used on program materials.
    [sbull] Collaborate with the recipient on a promotional program for 
raising awareness for risk management and for informing producers of 
training and informational opportunities. This will include: (a) 
Reviewing and approving in advance all promotional plans, materials, 
and programs; (b) serving on workgroups that plan promotional programs; 
(c) advising the applicant on technical issues relating to the 
presentation of crop insurance products in promotional materials; and 
(d) participating, as appropriate, in media programs designed to raise 
general awareness or provide farmers with risk management education.
    [sbull] Collaborate with the recipient on the delivery of education 
to agricultural producers and agribusiness leaders. This will include: 
(a) Reviewing and approving in advance all producer and agribusiness 
educational delivery plans; (b) advising the applicant on technical 
issues related to the delivery of crop insurance education and 
information; and (c) assisting the applicant in informing crop 
insurance professionals about educational plans and scheduled meetings.
    [sbull] Review and approve recipient's documentation of risk 
management educational activities.
3. Other Activities
    In addition to the specific, required activities listed above, the 
applicant may suggest other activities that would contribute directly 
to the purpose of this program. For any additional activity suggested, 
the applicant should identify the objective of the activity, the 
specific tasks required to meet the objective, specific time lines for 
performing the tasks, and the specific responsibilities of partners. 
The applicant must also identify specific ways in which RMA could have 
substantial involvement in the proposed educational activity.

Part II--Information for the Targeted States Program

A. General Information

1. Legislative Authority
    The Targeted States program is authorized under section 524(a)(2) 
of the Federal Crop Insurance Act (Act).
2. Background
    RMA promotes and regulates sound risk management solutions to 
improve the economic stability of American agriculture. On behalf of 
FCIC, RMA does this by offering Federal crop insurance products through 
a network of private-sector partners, overseeing the

[[Page 35367]]

creation of new risk management products, seeking enhancements in 
existing products, ensuring the integrity of crop insurance programs, 
offering outreach programs aimed at equal access and participation of 
underserved communities, and providing risk management education and 
information.
    One of RMA's four strategic goals is to ensure that its customers 
are well informed as to the risk management solutions available. This 
educational goal is supported by section 524(a) of the Act. This 
section authorizes funding for the establishment of crop insurance 
educational and outreach efforts in States that have historically been 
underserved by Federal crop insurance program. In accordance with the 
Act, the Secretary of Agriculture determined that fifteen States met 
the criteria for ``underserved'' and they are Connecticut, Delaware, 
Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New 
York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Utah, Vermont, West Virginia and 
Wyoming (collectively referred to as ``Targeted States'').
3. Project Goal
    The goal of the Targeted States program is to ensure that farmers 
and ranchers in the Targeted States are sufficiently informed so as to 
take full advantage of existing and emerging crop insurance products.
4. Purpose
    The purpose of the Targeted States program is to provide farmers 
and ranchers in Targeted States with education and information to be 
able to understand:
    [sbull] The kinds of risk addressed by crop insurance;
    [sbull] The features of existing and emerging crop insurance 
products;
    [sbull] The use of crop insurance in the management of risk; and
    [sbull] How the use of crop insurance can affect other risk 
management decisions, such as the use of marketing and financial tools.
    Each cooperative agreement awarded through this program will 
provide the recipient with funds, guidance, and the substantial 
involvement of RMA to carry out a program to achieve this purpose in a 
Targeted State.
    For some farms in Targeted States, existing crop insurance products 
are either not available or require enhancements to provide effective 
protection. The Act envisions new and enhanced insurance products that 
will meet the needs of these farmers and ranchers. Until these new 
products are available, producers would still benefit from an 
educational program that provides an understanding of crop insurance 
and the basic skills required for making a sound crop insurance 
decision.
    RMA envisions that most of the training and informational 
activities under these cooperative agreements will be conducted during 
the November 2003 through March 2004 period, which will be the best 
time to reach producers with educational programs in most areas. 
However, activities are not restricted to this time period because 
certain groups of producers might benefit from a different schedule of 
educational activities. RMA anticipates that, through these cooperative 
agreements, project leaders will have sufficient time to organize and 
schedule events, commit funds to reserve event facilities, gather 
materials, raise awareness, and otherwise make the preparations needed 
to ensure good producer participation in all planned educational 
activities. Most of all, RMA anticipates that project leaders will 
prepare by fostering the cooperation and active support of 
organizations with close ties to local producers. Support from such 
organizations is essential in influencing local producers to 
participate in the type of activities envisioned in this educational 
program.
    Projects funded through this program are envisioned to include the 
participation of multiple and diverse partners within the specific 
Targeted State. Partners should include public and private agricultural 
organizations in the Targeted State with a stake in ensuring that 
agricultural producers have increased knowledge and skill in using crop 
insurance. RMA specifically encourages applicants to address the needs 
of beginning farmers and ranchers as an important element of the 
project.

B. Eligibility/Funding

1. Eligible Applicants
    Eligibility applicants include State departments of agriculture, 
universities, non-profit agricultural organizations, and other public 
or private organizations with the capacity to lead a local program of 
crop insurance education for farmers and ranchers within a Targeted 
State. Individuals are eligible applicants. Applicants may apply to 
deliver education in more than one Targeted State, but a separate 
application must be submitted for each State. Applications for projects 
directed to producers outside of the Targeted States will not be 
considered for funding.
    Although an applicant may be eligible to compete for an award based 
on its status as an eligible entity, other factors may exclude an 
applicant from receiving Federal assistance under this program (e.g. 
debarment and suspension; a determination of non-performance on a prior 
contract, cooperative agreement, grant or partnership; a determination 
of a violation of applicable ethical standards).
2. Project Period
    Each project will be funded for a period of up to one year from the 
project starting date for the activities described in this 
announcement.
3. Availability of Funds and Amounts
    Approximately $4,250,000 is available in fiscal year 2003 to fund 
up to 15 projects, a maximum of one project for each of the Targeted 
States. It is expected that the awards will be made approximately 60 
days after the application deadline. All awards will be made and 
agreements approved and signed no later than September 30, 2003. 
Partnership or cooperative agreement funds may not be used to:
    a. Plan, repair, rehabilitate, acquire, or construct a building or 
facility including a processing facility;
    b. To purchase, rent, or install fixed equipment;
    c. Repair or maintain privately owned vehicles.
    d. Pay for the preparation of the partnership or cooperative 
agreement application;
    e. Fund political activities;
    f. Pay costs incurred prior to receiving a partnership or 
cooperative agreement;
    g. Fund any activities prohibited in 7 CFR Parts 3015 and 3019, as 
applicable.
    The approximate funding amount available for each Targeted State's 
project is as follows:


Maine......................................................     $217,000
New Hampshire..............................................      171,000
Vermont....................................................      218,000
Connecticut................................................      217,000
Rhode Island...............................................      156,000
Massachusetts..............................................      202,000
New York...................................................      565,000
New Jersey.................................................      258,000
Pennsylvania...............................................      687,000
Maryland...................................................      346,000
Delaware...................................................      249,000
West Virginia..............................................      202,000
Nevada.....................................................      201,000
Utah.......................................................      284,000
Wyoming....................................................      277,000
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................    4,250,000
 


    These State funding amounts were determined by first allocating an 
equal amount of $150,000 to each Targeted State. The remaining funds 
were allocated on a pro rata basis according

[[Page 35368]]

to each Targeted State's share of 1999 agricultural cash receipts 
relative to the total for all Targeted Sales. Both allocations were 
totaled for each Targeted State and rounded to the nearest $1,000.
    In the event that additional funds become available under this 
program or in the event that no application for a given Targeted State 
is recommended for funding by the evaluation panel, these additional 
funds may, at the discretion of the Manager of FCIC, be allocated pro-
rata to State award recipients by agreement between RMA and the award 
recipient for use in broadening the size or scope of awarded projects 
within the Targeted State or may be used to fund more than one project 
in a Targeted State.
    In the event that the Manager of FCIC determines that available RMA 
resources cannot support the administrative and substantial involvement 
requirements of all agreements recommended for funding, the Manager may 
elect to fund fewer agreements that the available funding might 
otherwise allow.

C. Program Description

    In conducting activities to achieve the purpose and goal of this 
program in a Targeted State, the award recipient will be responsible 
for the activities listed under paragraph 1 of this part. FCIC, working 
through RMA, will be substantially involved in the project and will be 
specifically responsible for the activities listed under paragraph 2.
1. Recipient Activities
    Award recipients will be required to perform the following 
activities:
    [sbull] Finalize the crop insurance education delivery plan that 
will accomplish the purpose of this program in the Targeted State. The 
plan must describe the manner in which various tasks for the project 
will be completed, the dates by which each task will be completed, and 
the partners that will have responsibility for each task. Task 
milestones must be listed so as to ensure that progress can be measured 
at various stages throughout the life of the project. The plan must 
also provide for the substantial involvement of RMA in the project. 
(Note: All cooperative agreements resulting from this announcement will 
include delivery plans prepared in a specific table format. All 
applicants are strongly encouraged to refer to this table format when 
preparing a delivery plan as part of the application narrative. Copies 
of the table format are available from the RMA website [www.rma.usda] 
or upon request.)
    [sbull] Assemble crop insurance instructional materials for 
producers in the Targeted State. This will include: (a) Gathering 
existing instructional materials that meet the local crop insurance 
needs of agricultural producers; (b) identifying instructional gaps in 
existing materials; and (c) development new materials or modifying 
existing materials to fill existing gaps.
    [sbull] Develop and conduct a promotional program. This program 
will include activities using media, newsletters, publications, or 
other appropriate informational dissemination techniques that are 
designed to: (a) Raise awareness for crop insurance; (b) inform 
producers of the availability of crop insurance; and (c) inform 
producers and agribusiness leaders in the Targeted State of the 
educational activities being offered.
    [sbull] Deliver education and information to producers and 
agribusienss professionals. This will include organizing and delivery 
educational activities using the instructional materials identified 
earlier. Activities should be directed primarily to agricultural 
producers, but may include those agribusiness professionals that have 
frequent opportunities to advise producers on crop insurance in the 
Targeted State.
    [sbull] Document all educational activities conducted under the 
cooperative agreement and the results of such activities, including 
criteria and indicators used to evaluate the success of the program. 
The recipient will also be required to provide information to an RMA-
selected contractor to evaluate all educational activities and advise 
RMA as to the effectiveness of activities.
2. RMA Activities
    RMA will be responsible for the following activities:
    [sbull] Review and approve in advance the recipient's project 
delivery plan.
    [sbull] Collaborate with the recipient in assembling crop insurance 
educational materials for producers in the Targeted State. This will 
include: (a) Reviewing and approving in advance all educational 
materials for technical accuracy; (b) serving on curriculum development 
workgroups; (c) providing curriculum developers with fact sheets and 
other crop insurance publications from RMA; (d) advising the applicant 
on the materials available over the internet through the AgRisk 
Education Library; (e) advising the applicant on technical issues 
related to crop insurance instructional materials; and (f) advising the 
applicant on the use of the standardized design and layout formats to 
be used on program materials.
    [sbull] Collaborate with the recipient on a promotional program for 
raising awareness on crop insurance and for informing producers of 
educational opportunities in the Targeted States. This will include: 
(a) Reviewing and approving in advance all promotional plans, 
materials, and programs; (b) serving on workgroups that plan 
promotional programs; (c) advising the applicant on technical issues 
relating to the presentation of crop insurance products in promotional 
materials; and (d) participating, as appropriate, in media programs 
designed to raise general awareness or provide farmers with crop 
insurance education.
    [sbull] Collaborate with the recipient on the delivery of education 
to producers and agribusiness leaders. This will include: (a) Reviewing 
and approving in advance all educational delivery plans; (b) advising 
the applicant on technical issues related to crop insurance education 
and information; and (c) assisting the applicant in informing crop 
insurance professionals about program delivery plans and scheduled 
meetings.
    [sbull] Review and approve recipient's documentation of crop 
insurance educational activities.
3. Other Activities
    In addition to the specific, required activities listed above, the 
applicant may suggest other activities that would contribute directly 
to the purpose of this program. For any additional activity suggested, 
the applicant should identify the objective of the activity, the 
specific tasks required to meet the objective, specific time lines for 
performing the tasks, and specific responsibilities of the partners. 
The applicant must also identify specific ways in which RMA could have 
substantial involvement in the proposed educational activity.

Part II--Preparation of an Application

A. Program Application Materials

    Program application materials for both the Commodity Partnerships 
and Targeted States programs under this announcement may be downloaded 
from the RMA Web site at: <a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a>. Applicants may also 
request application materials from: Michelle Fuller, USDA-RMA-RME, 1400 
Independence Ave. SW., Stop 0808, (Portals Bldg., Suite 508), 
Washington, DC 20250-0808, phone: (202) 720-6356, fax: (202) 690-3605, 
e-mail: <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#c5a8aca6ada0a9a9a0eba3b0a9a9a0b785b2a1a6ebb0b6a1a4eba2aab3"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="2b464248434e47474e054d5e47474e596b5c4f48055e584f4a054c445d">[email&#160;protected]</span></a> 
<mailto:<a href="mailto:michelle.fuller@wdc.usda.gov"><a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection" class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="c4a9ada7aca1a8a8a1eaa2b1a8a8a1b684b3a0a7eab1b7a0a5eaa3abb2">[email&#160;protected]</a></a><ls-thn-eq>.

B. Content of Applications

    A complete and valid application package must include an electronic

[[Page 35369]]

copy (Microsoft Word format) of the narrative portion of the 
application package on diskette or compact disc and an original and two 
paper copies of the complete application package, which must include 
the following:
    1. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424, ``Application for 
Federal Assistance.''
    2. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424-A, ``Budget 
Information--Non-construction Programs.'' Indirect costs allowed for 
projects submitted under this announcement will be limited to 10 
percent of the total direct cost of the partnership or cooperative 
agreement. If applying under the Commodity Partnerships program, 
Federal funding requested (the total of direct and indirect costs) must 
not exceed the level for the respective State or area, as specified in 
part I.B.4. If applying under the Targeted states program, Federal 
funding requested (the total of direct and indirect costs) must not 
exceed the level for the respective Targeted State, as specified in 
part II.B.3.
    3. A budget and detailed narrative in support of the budget that 
shows all funding sources and itemized costs for each line item 
contained on the SF-424-A. All budget categories must be individually 
listed (with costs) in the same order as the budget and justified on a 
separate sheet of paper and placed immediately behind the SF-424-A. 
There must be a detailed breakdown of all costs, including indirect 
costs. Include budget notes on each budget line item detailing how each 
line item was derived. Also provide a brief narrative description of 
any costs that may require explanation (i.e., why specific costs may be 
higher than market costs). Only items or services that are necessary 
for the successful completion of the project will be funded as 
permitted under the Act, the applicable Federal cost principles, and 
are not prohibited under any other Federal statute. Salaries of project 
personnel should be requested in proportion to the effort that they 
will devote to the project.
    4. A completed and signed OMB Standard Form 424-B, ``Assurances, 
Non-constructive programs.''
    5. [For the Commodity Partnerships program only]: A ``Statement of 
Non-financial Benefits.'' (Refer to part I.B.2, ``Non-financial 
Benefits'') This requirement does not apply to applications submitted 
under the Targeted States program.
    6. A narrative title page. This single page can provide: (a) The 
name of the project; (b) the name of the program under which funding is 
being requested, either Commodity Partnerships or Targeted States; (c) 
the specific State or area for which the project will be directed; (d) 
the organization submitting the application; (e) a listing of project 
partners; (f) a brief project summary; and (g) information needed to 
contact the project's leader, including an e-mail address.
    7. A written narrative (limited to ten single-sided pages) that 
describes the educational project in detail, including the program 
delivery plan. The narrative should provide reviewers with sufficient 
information to effectively evaluate the merits of the application under 
the criteria contained in part IV.B. In preparing narratives, 
applicants are strongly encouraged to carefully review and understand 
the specific features and authorities governing the specific program 
for which funds are being requested, as described in this announcement. 
The narrative should include the circumstances giving rise to the 
proposed activity; a clear, concise statement of the objectives; the 
steps necessary to implement the program to attain the objectives; an 
evaluation plan for the activities; and the management and work plan 
that describes how the activities will be managed by the applicant. The 
work plan should identify each objective and the key tasks to achieve 
the objective, the entity responsible for the task, the completion 
date, the task location, and RMA's role. Although the two programs have 
a number of similarities, there are also some important differences. 
The Commodity Partnership program, for instance, allows education 
regarding financial management, crop insurance, marketing contracts and 
other existing and emerging risk management tools. And it requires an 
emphasis on the training of producers of Priority Commodities, as 
described in this announcement. The Targeted States program, on the 
other hand, seeks to reach producers of all commodities in the fifteen 
Targeted States, but restricts training and informational activities to 
crop insurance. The narrative should reflect these differences. Also, 
all partnership and cooperative agreements resulting from this 
announcement will have delivery plans that are prepared in a specific 
table format. Therefore, applicants are strongly encouraged to refer to 
this table format when preparing a delivery plan and to use it in that 
portion of the application narrative that addresses the delivery plan. 
A sample narrative, including the table format, is available from the 
RMA Web site (<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a><<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a><ls-thn-eq>) or upon request.
    8. An appendix containing exhibits that the applicant believes will 
directly support the information provided in the narrative. (Optional 
under either of the two programs contained in this notice.)
    9. A completed and signed OMB Standard From LLL, ``Disclosure of 
Lobbying Activities.''
    10. A completed and signed AD-1047, ``Certification Regarding 
Debarment, Suspension and Other Responsibility Matters (Primary Covered 
Transactions).''
    11. A completed and signed AD-1049, ``Certification Regarding Drug-
Free Workplace.''
    Applicants are responsible for ensuring the application materials 
are received by the closing date. Incomplete application packages will 
not receive further consideration.

C. Submission of Applications

    1. An original and two paper copies of the completed and signed 
application, and one electronic copy (Microsoft Word Format) of the 
project narrative on diskette or compact disc must be submitted in one 
package at the time of initial submission.
    2. All applications must be submitted by the deadline. Applications 
that do not meet all the requirements in this announcement are 
considered as late applications. Late or incomplete applications will 
not be considered and will be returned to the applicant.
    3. Applications submitted through express, overnight mail or 
another delivery service will be considered as meeting the announced 
deadline if they are received in the mailroom at the address stated 
above for express, overnight mail or another delivery service on or 
before the deadline. Applicants are cautioned that express, overnight 
mail or other delivery services do not always deliver as agreed. 
Applicants should take this into account because failure of such 
delivery services will not extend the deadline. The address must appear 
on the envelope or package containing the application with the not 
``Attention: Risk Management Education Program.''
    4. Mailed applications will be considered as meeting the announced 
deadline if they are received on or before the deadline in the mailroom 
at the address stated above for mailed applications. Applicants are 
responsible for mailing applications well in advance, to ensure that 
applications are received on or before the deadline time and date. 
Applicants using the U.S. Postal Service should allow for the extra 
time for delivery due to the additional security measures that mail 
delivered to

[[Page 35370]]

government offices in the Washington, DC area now requires.
    5. RMA cannot accommodate transmissions of applications by 
facsimile or through other electronic media. Therefore, applications 
transmitted electronically will not be accepted regardless of the date 
or time of submission or the time of receipt.
    6. The deadline for receipt of an application is 5 p.m. EDT on July 
28, 2003. The application deadline is firm as to date and hour and 
applies to submission of the original application and two copies.

D. Acknowledgement of Applications

    Receipt of applications will be acknowledged by e-mail, whenever 
possible. Therefore, applicants are encouraged to provide e-mail 
addresses in the application. If an e-mail address is not indicated on 
an application, receipt will be acknowledged by letter. There will be 
no notification of incomplete, unqualified or unfunded applications 
until the awards have been made.
    When received by RMA, applications will be assigned an 
identification number. This number will be communicated to applicants 
in the acknowledgement of receipt of applications. An application's 
identification number should be referenced in all correspondence 
regarding the application. If the applicant does not receive an 
acknowledgement within 15 days of the submission deadline, the 
applicant should contact Michelle Fuller at (202) 720-6356.

Part IV--Review Process

A. General

    Each application will be evaluated using a two-part process. First, 
each application will be screened by RMA personnel to ensure that it 
meets the requirements in this announcement and sorted. RMA will first 
sort applications by program (either Commodity Partnership or Targeted 
States) then by States, area, or Targeted State in which the applicant 
proposes to conduct the project. Applications that do not meet the 
requirements of this announcement or are incomplete will not receive 
further consideration.
    Second, a review panel will consider the merits of all applications 
that meet the requirements in the announcement. The evaluation of each 
application will be conducted by a panel of not less than three 
independent reviewers. Reviewers will be drawn from USDA, other federal 
agencies, and others representing public and private organizations as 
needed. The narrative and any appendixes provided by each applicant 
will be used by the review panel to evaluate the merits of the project 
that is being proposed for funding.
    The panel will examine and score applications for each program 
(Commodity Partnerships and Targeted States) and for each State or area 
within each program based on the ``Evaluation Criteria and Weights'' 
contained in this paragraph B of this part. Each State or area's 
applications will be evaluated and scored independently.
    Applications for each State or area within each program will be 
evaluated and scored in each of the criteria listed below. The panel 
will be looking for the specific elements listed with each criterion 
when evaluating the applications and scoring them. For each 
application, panel members will assign a point value up to the maximum 
for each criterion. After all reviewers have evaluated and scored each 
of the applications, the scores for the entire panel will be averaged 
to determine an application's final score. After all applications have 
been rated and scored, a lottery will be used to resolve any instances 
of a tie total score for the winning application for a given State or 
area. If such a lottery is required for a given State or area within a 
program, the names of all tied applicants will be entered into a 
drawing. The first applicant drawn will be recommended to received a 
partnership or cooperative agreement for that State or area under the 
program. The review panel will report to the Manager of FCIC on the 
results of the evaluation for both the Commodity Partnerships and 
Targeted States program. For the Commodity Partnership program, the 
panel's report will include the recommended applicant to receive a 
partnership agreement for each State or area. For the Targeted States 
program, the panel's report will include the recommended applicant to 
receive a cooperative agreement for each Targeted State. If the final 
score for the highest rated application for a State, area, or Targeted 
State is less than 50, the panel may, at its discretion, recommend that 
the Manager not provide funding for that States, area, or Targeted 
State. The Manager of FCIC will make the final determination on those 
applications that will be awarded funding.
    An organizations, or group of organizations in partnership, may 
apply for funding under other FCIC or RMA programs, in addition to the 
programs described in this announcement. However, if the Manager of 
FCIC determines that an application recommended for funding under 
either of the two programs of this announcement is sufficiently similar 
to a project that has been funded or has been recommended to be funded 
under another RMA or FCIC education or outreach program, then the 
Manager may elect to not fund that application in whole or in part.

B. Evaluation Criteria and Weights

    Applications submitted under both the Commodity Partnerships and 
Targeted States programs will be evaluated according to the following 
criteria:
1. Project Management--Maximum 25 Points
    The applicant must demonstrate an ability to implement sound and 
effective project management practices. Higher scores will be awarded 
to applicants that can demonstrate organizational skills, leadership, 
and experience in delivering services or programs that assist 
agricultural producer in the State or area. If the applicant has been a 
recipient of other Federal or other government grants, cooperative 
agreements, or contracts, the applicant must also detail that they have 
consistently complied with financial and program reporting and auditing 
requirements. Applicants that will employ, or have access to, personnel 
who have experience in directing agricultural programs or providing 
educations programs that benefit producers in the State or area will 
receive higher rankings.
2. Partnering--Maximum 25 Points
    The applicant must demonstrate experience and capacity to partner 
with and gain the support of grower organizations, agribusiness 
professionals, and agricultural leaders to carry out a local program of 
education and information in the State or area. Applicants will receive 
higher scores to the extent that they can document and demonstrate: (a) 
That partnership commitments are in place for the express purpose of 
delivering the program in this announcement; (b) that a broad and 
diverse group of farmers and ranchers will be reached; and (c) that a 
substantial effort has been made to partner with organizations that can 
meet the needs of producers that are small, have limited resources, are 
minorities, or are beginning farmers and ranchers.
3. Delivery Plan--Maximum 25 Points
    The applicant must demonstrate that its program delivery plan is 
clear and specific. For each of the applicant's responsibilities 
contained in the

[[Page 35371]]

description of the program for which funds are requested (either part 
I.C.1 for the Commodity Partnerships program or part II.C.1 for the 
Targeted States program), the applicant must demonstrate that it can 
identify specific tasks and provide reasonable time lines that further 
the purpose of this program. Applicants will obtain a higher score to 
the extent that the tasks of the project are specific, measurable, and 
reasonable, have specific time frames for completion, relate directly 
to the required activities and program objectives described in this 
announcement, and are sensitive to the needs of producers that are 
small, have limited resources, are minorities, or are beginning in the 
farming or ranching business. For guidance on a delivery plan format, 
applicants are encouraged to refer to a table format available from the 
RMA Web site (<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a><<a href="http://www.rma.usda.gov">http://www.rma.usda.gov</a><ls-thn-eq>) or upon request.
4. Project Benefits--Maximum 25 Points
    The applicant must demonstrate that the project benefits to farmers 
and ranchers in the State or area warrant the funding requested. 
Applicants will be scored according to the extent they can: (a) 
Reasonably estimate the number of producers reached through the 
project; (b) justify the estimates with clear specifics related to the 
delivery plan; (c) identify the actions producers will likely be able 
to take as a result of the project; and (d) identify specific measures 
for evaluating the success of the project. Reviewers' scoring will be 
based on the scope and reasonableness of the applicants' estimates of 
producers reached through the project, clear descriptions of specific 
expected project benefits for producers, and well-constructed plans for 
measuring the project's effectiveness.
5. Bonus (Drought Mitigation in Selected Areas)--Maximum 20 Points
    [Limited to applications under the Commodity Partnership program. 
Bonus scoring does not apply to applications submitted under the 
Targeted States program.] Bonus points will be awarded for those 
applications under the Commodity Partnership program that address the 
educational needs of producers of livestock and forage and livestock 
producers who use rangeland with respect to drought risk mitigation. 
Bonus points will be awarded based on the extent that the project 
focuses on helping these producers understand the programs, tools, and 
risk management strategies for effectively managing their operations in 
the face of drought in the States of Montana, South Dakota, Arizona, 
Multi-state Area 1 (Utah, Nevada, Wyoming), New Mexico, Texas, Idaho, 
Oregon, Colorado, Louisiana, and Nebraska.

C. Confidentiality

    The names of applicants, the names of individuals identified in the 
applications, the content of applications, and the panel evaluations of 
applications will all be kept confidential, except to those involved in 
the review process, to the extent permitted by law. In addition, the 
identities of review panel members will remain confidential throughout 
the entire review process and will not be released to applicants. At 
the end of the fiscal year, names of panel members will be made 
available. However, panelists will not be identified with the review of 
any particular application.

Part V--Additional Information

A. Requirement To Use Program Logo

    Applicants awarded partnership or cooperative agreements will be 
required to use a program logo and design provided by RMA for all 
instructional and promotional materials.

B. Requirement To Provide Project Information to an RMA-Selected 
Contractor

    Applicants awarded partnership or cooperative agreements will be 
required to assist RMA in evaluating the effectiveness of its education 
programs by providing documentation of educational activities and 
related information to any contractor selected by RMA for program 
evaluation purposes.

C. Private Crop Insurance Organizations and Potential Conflicts of 
Interest

    Private organizations that are involved in the sale of Federal crop 
insurance, or that have financial ties to such organizations, are 
eligible to apply for funding under either of the two educational 
programs described in this announcement. However, such entities will 
not be allowed to receive funding to conduct activities that would 
otherwise be required under a Standard Reinsurance Agreement or any 
other agreement in effect between FCIC and the entity. Such entities 
will also not be allowed the receive funding to conduct activities that 
could be perceived by producers as promoting one company's services or 
products over another's. If applying for funding, such organizations 
are encouraged to be sensitive to potential conflicts of interest and 
to describe in their application the specific actions they will take to 
avoid actual and perceived conflicts of interest.

D. Access to Panel Review Information

    Upon written request from the applicant, scores from the evaluation 
panel, not including the identify of reviewers, will be sent to the 
applicant after the review and awards process has been completed.

E. Notification of Cooperative or Partnership Agreement Awards

    Following approval by the awarding official of RMA of the 
applications selected for funding, project leaders whose applications 
have been selected for funding will be notified. Within the limit of 
funds available for such a purpose, the awarding official of RMA shall 
enter into partnership or cooperative agreements with those applicants 
whose applications are judged to be most meritorious under the 
procedures set forth in this announcement. The agreements provide the 
amount of Federal funds for use in the project period, the terms and 
conditions of the award, and the time period for the project. The 
effective date of the agreement shall be on the date the agreement is 
executed by both parties and it shall remain in effect for up to one 
year. RMA will then extend to award recipients, in writing, the 
authority to draw down funds for the purpose of conducting the 
activities listed in the agreement. All funds provided to the applicant 
by FCIC must be expended solely for the purpose for which the funds are 
obligated in accordance with the approved agreement and budget, the 
regulations, the terms and conditions of the award, and the 
applicability of Federal costs principles. No commitment of Federal 
assistance beyond the project period is made or implied for any award 
resulting from this notice. Notification of denial of funding will be 
sent to applicants after final funding decisions have been made. 
Reasons for denial of funding can include incomplete proposals, scored 
low or were duplicative.

F. Confidential Aspects of Proposals and Awards

    When an application results in a partnership or cooperative 
agreement, it becomes a part of the official record of RMA 
transactions, available to the public upon specific request. 
Information that the Secretary of Agriculture determines to be of a 
confidential, privileged, or proprietary nature will be held in 
confidence to the extent permitted by law. Therefore, any informaion 
that the applicant wishes to be considered confidential, privileged, or 
proprietary should be clearly marked within an application, including 
the

[[Page 35372]]

basis for such designation. The original copy of a proposal that does 
not result in an award will be retained by RMA for a period of one 
year. Other copies will be destroyed. Copies of proposals not receiving 
awards will be released only with the express written consent of the 
applicant or to the extent required by law. A proposal may be withdrawn 
at any time prior to award.

G. Reporting Requirements

    Applicants awarded partnership or cooperative agreements will be 
required to submit quarterly progress and financial reports (OMB 
Standard Form 269) throughout the project period, as well as a final 
program and financial report not later than 90 days after the end of 
the project period.

H. Audit Requirements

    Applicants awarded partnership or cooperative agreements are 
subject to audit.

I. Prohibitions and Requirements With Regard to Lobbying

    Section 1352 of Public Law 101-121, enacted on October 23, 1989, 
imposes prohibitions and requirements for disclosure and certification 
related to lobbying on recipients of Federal contracts, grants, 
cooperative agreements, and loans. It provides exemtions for Indian 
Tribes and tribal organizations. Current and prospective recipients, 
and any subcontractors, are prohibited from using Federal funds, other 
than profits from a Federal contract, for lobbying Congress or any 
Federal agency in connection with the award of a contract, grant, 
cooperative agreement, or loan. In addition, for each award action in 
excess of $100,000 ($150,000 for loans) the law requires recipients and 
any subcontractors: (1) To certify that they have neither used nor will 
use any appropriated funds for payment of lobbyists; (2) to disclose 
the name, address, payment details, and purpose of any agreements with 
lobbyists whom recipients of their subcontractors will pay with profits 
or other nonappropriated funds on or after December 22, 1989; and (3) 
to file quarterly up-dates about the use of lobbyists if material 
changes occur in their use. The law establishes civil penalties for 
non-compliance. A copy of the certification and disclosure forms must 
be submitted with the application and are available from Michelle 
Fuller at the above stated address and telephone number.

J. Applicable OMB Circulars

    All partnership and cooperative agreements funded as a result of 
this notice will be subject to the requirements contained in all 
applicable OMB circulars.

    Signed in Washington, DC, on May 10, 2003.
Ross J. Davidson, Jr.,
Manager, Federal Crop Insurance Corporation.
[FR Doc. 03-14955 Filed 6-12-03; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3410-08-M


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>