<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 81 Issue 126 (Thursday, June 30, 2016)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 81, Number 126 (Thursday, June 30, 2016)]
[Notices]
[Pages 42641-42644]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2016-15525]



[[Page 42641]]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Forest Service


Revision of Land and Resource Management Plan for the Santa Fe 
National Forest; Counties of Los Alamos, Mora, Rio Arriba, Sandoval, 
San Miguel, Santa Fe, and Taos, New Mexico

AGENCY: Forest Service, USDA.

ACTION: Notice of Intent to revise the Santa Fe National Forest Land 
and Resource Management Plan and to prepare an associated Environmental 
Impact Statement (EIS).

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Forest Service is revising the Land and Resource 
Management Plan (hereafter referred to as the forest plan) for the 
Santa Fe National Forest. This notice describes the documents 
(assessment report, summaries of public meetings, preliminary needs-to-
change statements) currently available for review and how to obtain 
them; summarizes the needs to change to the existing forest plan; 
provides information concerning public participation and engagement, 
including the process for submitting comments; provides an estimated 
schedule for the planning process, including the time available for 
comments, and includes the names and addresses of agency contacts who 
can provide additional information.

DATES: Comments concerning the Needs for Change and Proposed Action 
provided in this notice will be most useful in the development of the 
revised forest plan and draft EIS if received by August 5, 2016. The 
agency expects to release a draft revised forest plan and draft EIS by 
summer, 2017 and a final revised forest plan and final EIS by fall, 
2018.

ADDRESSES: Written correspondence can be sent to: Santa Fe National 
Forest, Attn: Forest Plan, 11 Forest Lane, Santa Fe, NM 87508, or 
emailed to <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#6211030c16030407040d10071116120e030c2204114c0407064c1711"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="ee9d8f809a8f888b88819c8b9d9a9e828f80ae889dc0888b8ac09b9d">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jennifer Cramer, Forest Planner, Santa 
Fe National Forest, 11 Forest Lane, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87508. More 
information on our forest plan revision process can be found on our Web 
site at <a href="http://www.fs.usda.gov/goto/santafeforestplan">www.fs.usda.gov/goto/santafeforestplan</a>. If you have questions 
or would like to sign-up for our mailing list, you can email 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#81f2e0eff5e0e7e4e7eef3e4f2f5f1ede0efc1e7f2afe7e4e5aff4f2"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="3f4c5e514b5e595a59504d5a4c4b4f535e517f594c11595a5b114a4c">[email&#160;protected]</span></a> or call our Forest Plan Revision number: 
505-438-5442. Individuals who use telecommunication devices for the 
deaf (TDD) may call the Federal Information Relay Service (FIRS) at 1-
800-877-8339 between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m., Eastern Time, Monday through 
Friday.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The National Forest Management Act (NFMA) of 
1976 requires that every National Forest System (NFS) unit develop a 
forest plan. On April 9, 2012, the Forest Service finalized its land 
management planning rule (2012 Planning Rule, 36 CFR 219), which 
describes requirements for the planning process and the content of the 
forest plans. Forest plans describe the strategic direction for 
management of forest resources for ten to fifteen years, and are 
adaptive and amendable as conditions change over time. Under the 2012 
Planning Rule, the assessment of ecological, social, and economic 
conditions and trends is the first stage of the planning process (36 
CFR 219.6). The second stage, formal plan revision, involves the 
development of our forest plan in conjunction with the preparation of 
an Environmental Impact Statement under the NEPA. The third stage of 
the process is monitoring and feedback, which is ongoing over the life 
of the revised forest plans.
    The Santa Fe National Forest has completed its assessment pursuant 
to 2012 Forest Planning Rule. The assessment was developed with public 
participation and includes an evaluation of existing information about 
relevant ecological, economic, cultural and social conditions, trends, 
and sustainability and their relationship to forest plans within the 
context of the broader landscape. The intent of the Santa Fe National 
Forest is that this information builds a common understanding prior to 
entering formal plan revision. With this notice, the Santa Fe National 
Forest is initiating formal plan revision and invites other 
governments, non-governmental parties, and the public to contribute. 
The intent of public engagement is to inform development of the plan 
revision. We encourage contributors to share material that may be 
relevant to the planning process, including desired conditions for the 
Santa Fe National Forest. As we develop public engagement opportunities 
to assist with the plan revision phase, public announcements will be 
made and information will be posted on the Forest's Web site: 
<a href="http://www.fs.usda.gov/goto/santafeforestplan">www.fs.usda.gov/goto/santafeforestplan</a>. If you would like to contribute 
to the process or for more information, please call 505-438-5442, email 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#bbc8dad5cfdadddeddd4c9dec8cfcbd7dad5fbddc895dddedf95cec8"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="c6b5a7a8b2a7a0a3a0a9b4a3b5b2b6aaa7a886a0b5e8a0a3a2e8b3b5">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>, or contact Jennifer Cramer, Forest 
Planner, Santa Fe National Forest, 505-438-5449.

Name and Address of the Responsible Official

    The Responsible Official for the revision of the forest plan for 
the Santa Fe National Forest is Maria T. Garcia, Forest Supervisor, 
Santa Fe National Forest, 11 Forest Lane, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87508.

Nature of the Decision To Be Made

    The Santa Fe National Forest is proposing to revise the existing 
forest plan and is preparing an EIS to inform the Forest Supervisor so 
she can decide which alternative best maintains and restores National 
Forest System terrestrial and aquatic resources while providing 
ecosystem services and multiple uses, as required by the National 
Forest Management Act and the Multiple Use Sustained Yield Act.
    The revised forest plan will describe the strategic intent of 
managing the Santa Fe National Forest for the next 10 to 15 years and 
will address the identified needs for change to the existing forest 
plan. The revised forest plan will provide management direction in the 
form of desired conditions, objectives, standards, guidelines, and 
suitability of lands. It will identify delineation of new management 
areas and potentially geographic areas across the Forest; identify the 
timber sale program quantity; make recommendations to Congress for 
Wilderness designation; and list rivers and streams eligible for 
inclusion in the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System. The revised 
forest plan will also provide a description of the plan area's 
distinctive roles and contributions within the broader landscape, 
identify watersheds that are a priority for maintenance or restoration, 
include a monitoring program, and contain information reflecting 
expected possible actions over the life of the forest plan.
    The revised forest plan will represent decisions that are strategic 
in nature, but will not make site-specific project decisions and will 
not dictate day-to-day administrative activities needed to carry on the 
Forest Service's internal operations. The authorization of project 
level activities will be based on the guidance/direction contained in 
the revised forest plan, but will occur through subsequent project 
specific NEPA analysis and decision-making.
    The revised forest plan will provide broad, strategic guidance that 
is consistent with other laws and regulations. Though strategic 
guidance will be provided, no decisions will be made regarding the 
management of individual roads or trails, such as those might be 
associated with a Travel

[[Page 42642]]

Management plan under 36 CFR part 212. Some issues (e.g., hunting 
regulations), although important, are beyond the authority or control 
of the National Forest System and will not be considered. No decision 
regarding oil and gas leasing availability will be made, though plan 
components may be brought forward or developed that will help guide the 
development of oil & gas leasing decisions that might be necessary in 
the future.

Purpose and Need (Needs for Change) and Proposed Action

    According to the National Forest Management Act, forest plans are 
to be revised every 10 to 15 years. The proposed action is to revise 
the forest plan to address the identified needs for change to the 
existing forest plan. Alternatives to the proposed action will be 
developed to address significant issues identified through scoping.
    The purpose and need for revising the current forest plan are to: 
(1) Update the forest plan which was approved in 1987 and is over 29 
years old, (2) reflect changes in economic, social, and ecological 
conditions, new policies and priorities, and new information based on 
monitoring and scientific research, and (3) address the preliminary 
identified needs for change to the existing forest plan, which are 
summarized below. Extensive public and interdisciplinary team 
involvement, along with science-based evaluations, have helped to 
identify these preliminary needs for change to the existing forest 
plan.
    What follows is a summary of the preliminary identified needs for 
change to the existing forest plan. A more fully developed description 
of the preliminary needs for change, which has been organized into 
several resource and management topic sections, is available for review 
on the plan revision Web site at: <a href="http://www.fs.usda.gov/goto/santafeforestplan">www.fs.usda.gov/goto/santafeforestplan</a>.
    The Santa Fe National Forest has identified twelve focus areas, the 
first topics presented below, that have the greatest needs for new or 
different plan direction. Needs for change for additional resources 
follow and represent additional cases where changes are needed in plan 
direction. Overall, there is a need for plan direction that is 
strategic and identifies desired conditions with objectives for how 
resources should be managed; eliminates redundancies with existing 
laws, regulations and policy; removes requirements to prepare 
additional resource plans; and that incorporates the best available 
scientific information (BASI) into all plan components.
    Monitoring. Monitoring is a critical element of adaptive 
management, and the plan monitoring program needs to be focused to be 
effective. Monitoring questions that are relevant to plan components 
including desired conditions, standards, guidelines, suitability and 
other strategic goals of the revised forest plan are needed. In 
addition, monitoring at appropriate scales is needed, including 
monitoring beyond the Santa Fe National Forest boundary to compare 
resources on the forest with their status on a larger context scale or 
even between neighboring forests.
    Relationships & Partners. Relationships and effective partnerships 
are key to the successful implementation of the forest plan that will 
protect the land and serve the people. Management approaches are needed 
to both streamline the processes that leverage partners and volunteers 
and build stronger relationships with the public, including but not 
limited to state and federal agencies, cities and counties, tribal 
governments, recreational and forest user groups, environmental groups, 
land grant communities and other traditional communities, local 
communities, youth, and vendors. Management approaches are also needed 
that will emphasize public education regarding the Santa Fe National 
Forest's diverse ecological, social, and economic resources, the 
multiple-use philosophy, public laws and regulations, and management 
strategies.
    Frequent Fire (Low Severity) Systems. Fire exclusion and past 
management activities have limited frequent, low-severity wildfires on 
the landscape. Wildfire atypical of historic fire regimes has resulted 
from higher densities of trees, increased fuel loadings, and altered 
species composition from mature, fire-tolerant species toward shade-
tolerant, less fire-resistant species. There is a need for plan 
direction that recognizes the natural processes of fire and its use as 
a management tool for vegetation types on the Santa Fe National Forest 
and that supports integrated resource objectives.
    Grass Cover. Grassland, woodland and shrubland have significantly 
less grass cover and productivity as a result of legacy (historical) 
grazing from livestock, wildlife grazing, roads, and the exclusion of 
wildfire. This lack of cover contributes to reduced water infiltration, 
accelerated erosion and declining soil productivity, especially during 
periods of drought and contributes to a cycle that continues to reduce 
vegetative cover. In addition, native grasses on much of the landscape 
have been replaced with non-native and/or invasive species and are not 
as effective in the prevention of erosion or as productive for forage. 
There is a need for desired conditions and standards and guidelines 
that allow for the restoration, conservation, and maintenance of grass 
productivity and diversity, emphasizing native grasses. Desired 
conditions that limit and reverse woody species encroachment into 
grasslands and infill of shrublands, woodlands, and forested systems 
are also needed.
    Riparian Ecosystems. Riparian systems have been degraded and are at 
risk across the forest. A variety of land uses (e.g., roads, grazing, 
recreation), increased water demand (water withdrawal) and climatic 
changes (e.g., long-term drought) have deteriorated these systems. 
There is a need for desired conditions to restore or maintain 
characteristic composition and cover of riparian vegetation. There is a 
need for standards and guidelines that minimize the ecological impacts 
of multiple uses in riparian areas, and a recognition of their reliance 
on upland ecological health.
    Restoration of Ecosystem Resiliency. Resiliency is the ability of 
an ecosystem to regain structure, composition, and function following 
disturbance on a time span that is consistent with the dynamics of the 
ecosystem. There is a need for plan direction that recognizes the 
interdependence of resources, provides for management areas that 
reflect natural features and/or ecological boundaries, incorporates 
adaptive management components to better respond to changing 
environmental conditions, and support an all-lands approach of working 
with neighboring land managers to implement projects that improve 
landscape connectivity across mixed ownerships where natural systems 
span multiple administrative boundaries. In addition, desired 
conditions are needed that promote natural disturbance processes that 
sustain forest carbon sequestration and emphasize silvicultural 
practices of uneven-aged management, and standards and guidelines that 
limit non-native species while encouraging native species.
    Water. Both natural and human-caused disturbances have degraded 
water quality and quantity. As population around the Santa Fe National 
Forest increases, the lack of surface water will place a greater demand 
on groundwater resources which may further deplete surface flows both 
on and off the forest. There is a need for plan direction to protect 
stream channels, hydrological function and

[[Page 42643]]

condition of water-dependent systems by maintaining and restoring 
upland and riparian vegetative cover and reducing erosion and 
sedimentation from disturbed sites (e.g., reclaiming roads) where 
feasible. There is also a need for plan direction which provides for 
sustainable groundwater-dependent ecosystems (e.g., seeps and springs, 
fens, and wetlands) and for the long-term protection of groundwater 
quality and quantity on the Santa Fe National Forest. There is a need 
for plan direction that considers consumptive water uses and water 
rights because water is over allocated and will continue to be in high 
demand.
    Soils. Soil condition, and soil erosion hazard are directly linked 
to site productivity and soil resilience, and current soil loss rates 
exceed natural soil loss rates across the Santa Fe National Forest. The 
majority of the Santa Fe National Forest has a high probability for 
accelerated erosion due to natural disturbances or management 
disturbances that expose the soil surface without incorporating erosion 
control measures. There is a need for plan direction that promotes the 
maintenance and restoration of soil condition and function (e.g., 
hydrology, stability, and nutrient cycling) by limiting the amount of 
exposed soil and by restoring and maintaining sufficient vegetative 
cover.
    Range. Vegetation analyses show that the grassland types commonly 
used for livestock grazing are losing productivity due to declines in 
herbaceous ground cover, invasive species and drought. Other key 
influences include fractured ownership of private lands, legal 
uncertainties about land titles, and endangered species listings by the 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, including the New Mexico Meadow Jumping 
Mouse. There is a need for plan direction that provides opportunities 
to use adaptive management for the range program that incorporates 
ecosystem-based desired conditions, with particular emphasis on 
strategies to address drought and other extreme weather-related events.
    Recreation. The ability of the Santa Fe National Forest to provide 
a meaningful recreation program is at risk, reflecting increasing and 
changing demands in a resource-constrained management environment. 
There is a need for plan direction on sustainable recreation management 
to provide high quality recreational experiences that are consistent 
with the Santa Fe National Forest's social, environmental, and 
economical resource capacity while balancing changing trends in 
services and intended use of recreation infrastructure and facilities. 
Plan direction is also needed to help manage recreation activity 
impacts to areas sensitive to resource degradation or at risk due to 
high visitation and to reduce user conflicts.
    Infrastructure. The Santa Fe National Forest's ability to maintain 
its current infrastructure is severely threatened. Of the approximately 
6,900 miles of roads on the landscape, 2,200 miles of roads are open to 
the public for motorized use. The remaining 4,700 miles of roads may be 
administrative use roads or non-system roads, and most contribute to 
erosion and sedimentation, reflecting a critical and growing gap in 
resources for maintenance. There is also infrastructure related to 
rural and agronomic uses, such as timber harvesting, grazing, and 
rangeland management. Much of the range infrastructure across the 
forest is non-functional and/or in need of maintenance or 
decommissioning. Non-functional water developments and downed fencing 
result in cattle seeking water in sensitive riparian areas. 
Unmaintained and vandalized range improvements can also be hazardous 
for wildlife. There is a need for plan direction to ensure sustainable 
infrastructure (e.g., roads, recreation and administrative facilities, 
range improvements, maintenance, etc.) and standards and guidelines 
that address negative impacts of existing roads.
    Land Status and Ownership. The Lands Program on the Santa Fe 
National Forest has increasing demands for services such as managing 
access to private inholdings, managing encroachments from private land 
onto Forest Service land, title claims, evolving requests for 
communication sites, the ever-growing Wildland Urban Interface area, 
completing property boundary surveys, and fragmentation. There is a 
need for plan direction regarding access to private lands, including 
during evaluation of placement of infrastructure, to minimize natural 
resource damage while ensuring rights of access to private lands are 
respected. Due to growing demand, plan direction regarding sites for 
communications infrastructure is needed. Plan direction is also needed 
to protect existing public access rights and provide for new 
recreational access opportunities to National Forest lands. Management 
approaches that support coordination between local governments and the 
Forest Service regarding permits, leases, and easements on National 
Forest lands are needed.
    Wildlife, Fish, and Plants. There is a need for plan direction that 
supports restoration and maintenance of ecological conditions that 
contribute to the recovery and conservation of federally listed species 
(threatened and endangered), maintaining viable populations of the 
species of conservation concern, and maintaining common and abundant 
species. In addition, plan direction for terrestrial and aquatic 
habitat connectivity for species migration and movement is needed.
    Air. There is a need for plan direction for air quality in terms of 
ambient air quality, visibility, and critical loads.
    Socioeconomic Resources. There is a need for plan direction that 
recognizes the Santa Fe National Forest's role in contributing to 
traditional and cultural forest uses and local economies, including 
service-based sectors such as recreation and tourism, timber, and other 
multiple-use related activities and products.
    Designated Areas. There is a need for plan direction to identify 
and evaluate potential additions to the National Wilderness 
Preservation System and eligibility for inclusion in the National Wild 
and Scenic Rivers System. In addition, plan direction for designated 
and recommended wilderness areas is needed to protect and enhance 
wilderness values and character.
    Scenery. There is a need for plan direction to integrate scenery 
management into all resource management decisions with the intent of 
retaining and enhancing scenic resources while integrating with other 
resources (e.g., restoration, habitat diversity, and timber 
management).
    Cultural Resources. There is a need for plan direction to 
stabilize, preserve, interpret, and protect historic and sensitive 
properties, (e.g., archaeological sites, historic structures, and 
traditional cultural properties). There is also a need for plan 
direction that recognizes the inherent value and preservation of Native 
American traditional cultural properties and sacred sites, as well as 
non-Native American traditional cultural properties, while maintaining 
the anonymity of such sites where appropriate.
    Traditional and Cultural Ways of Life. There are deep and historic 
ties between nearby populations and the Santa Fe National Forest, and 
the revised plan needs to recognize and protect historic and 
contemporary cultural uses--both economic and non-economic--for tribes 
as well as traditional communities not considered under tribal 
relations (e.g. traditional Hispanic and Anglo communities).
    Areas of Tribal Importance. There is a need for management 
approaches that include opportunities for integrating forest management 
with tribal needs through shared stewardship to address

[[Page 42644]]

threats to adjacent tribal resources (e.g., through the Tribal Forest 
Protection Act of 2004), to meet common objectives identified in tribal 
and pueblo land management plans, and to utilize an ``all lands'' 
approach to resources management.
    Extractive multiple uses. There is a need for plan direction that 
provides for the use of a variety of forest products by commercial, 
noncommercial, tribal, and land grant users. There is a need for plan 
direction that allows for flexible size criteria regarding timber 
extraction to balance desired conditions and the ability to provide 
economically viable forest products. There is a need for plan direction 
regarding traditional and alternative energy sources that balances 
demand with natural resource impacts.

Public Involvement

    A Notice of initiating the assessment phase of forest plan revision 
for the Santa Fe National Forest was published in the Federal Register 
on March 6, 2014 (79 FR 12686). Prior to the formal initiation of the 
assessment, the Santa Fe National Forest held 27 joint listening 
sessions with the Carson National Forest and two workshops to solicit 
comments, input, and desires from the public, governmental entities, 
tribes, land grants, and nongovernmental organization for public 
participation through the forest plan revision process. In April and 
May 2014, fourteen public meetings provided an introduction to forest 
plan revision and an opportunity for the public to provide input for 
the assessment by expressing how they use and value the forest, and 
what trends or changes they have observed. This information was 
directly incorporated into the assessment report for the Santa Fe 
National Forest ``Input Received from Public Meetings''. In April and 
May 2015, the Santa Fe and Carson National Forests jointly held three 
meetings with members of local land grants, to present and discuss the 
plan revision process. In October 2015, the forest held a symposium to 
present detailed findings from the assessment followed by ten public 
and two tribal work sessions on developing Need for Change statements. 
Additionally, the Santa Fe National Forest has been informing and 
engaging communities at a local level through presentation at meetings 
hosted by organizations, government groups and Tribes; informational 
booths at fairs and local community events; and presentations and field 
trips for local schools.
    Any comments related to the Santa Fe National Forest's assessment 
report that are received following the publication of this Notice may 
be considered in the draft and final environmental impact statements.

Scoping Process

    Written comments received in response to this notice will be 
analyzed to complete the identification of the needs for change to the 
existing forest plan, further develop the proposed action, and identify 
potential significant issues. Significant issues will, in turn, form 
the basis for developing alternatives to the proposed action. Comments 
on the preliminary needs for change and proposed action will be most 
valuable if received by August 17, 2016, and should clearly articulate 
the reviewer's opinions and concerns. Comments received in response to 
this notice, including the names and addresses of those who comment, 
will be part of the public record. Comments submitted anonymously will 
be accepted and considered in the NEPA process; however, anonymous 
comments will not provide the Agency with the ability to provide the 
respondent with subsequent environmental documents. See the below 
objection process material, particularly the requirements for filing an 
objection, for how anonymous comments are handled during the objection 
process. Refer to the Forest's Web site (<a href="http://www.fs.usda.gov/goto/santafeforestplan">www.fs.usda.gov/goto/santafeforestplan</a>) for information on when public meetings will be 
scheduled for refining the proposed action and identifying possible 
alternatives to the proposed action.

Applicable Planning Rule

    Preparation of the revised forest plan for the Santa Fe National 
Forest began with the publication of a Notice of Assessment Initiation 
in the Federal Register on March 6, 2014 (79 FR 12686) and was 
initiated under the planning procedures contained in the 2012 Forest 
Service planning rule (36 CFR 219 (2012)).

Permits or Licenses Required To Implement the Proposed Action

    No permits or licenses are needed for the development or revision 
of a forest plan.

Decisions Will Be Subject To Objection

    The decision to approve the revised forest plan for the Santa Fe 
National Forest will be subject to the objection process identified in 
36 CFR part 219 Subpart B (219.50 to 219.62). According to 36 CFR 
219.53(a), those who may file an objection are individuals and entities 
who have submitted substantive formal comments related to forest plan 
revision during the opportunities provided for public comment during 
the planning process.

Documents Available for Review

    The Needs for Change documentation, the Assessment Report, 
summaries of the public meetings and public meeting materials, and 
public comments and responses are posted on the Forest's Web site at: 
<a href="http://www.fs.usda.gov/goto/santafeforestplan">www.fs.usda.gov/goto/santafeforestplan</a>. As necessary or appropriate, 
the material available on this site will be further adjusted as part of 
the planning process using the provisions of the 2012 planning rule.

    Authority: 16 U.S.C. 1600-1614; 36 CFR part 219 [77 FR 21260-
21273].

    Dated: June 23, 2016.
Joseph S. Norrell,
Deputy Forest Supervisor.
[FR Doc. 2016-15525 Filed 6-29-16; 8:45 am]
 BILLING CODE 3410-11-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>