<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 90 Issue 166 (Friday, August 29, 2025)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 166 (Friday, August 29, 2025)]
[Notices]
[Pages 42179-42182]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2025-16581]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Forest Service


Special Areas; Roadless Area Conservation; National Forest System 
Lands

AGENCY: Forest Service, Agriculture (USDA).

ACTION: Notice of intent to prepare an environmental impact statement.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The U.S. Department of Agriculture is initiating an 
environmental impact statement (EIS) and rulemaking concerning 
management of inventoried roadless areas on approximately 44.7 million 
acres of National Forest System lands, including in Alaska. The 
proposed rule would rescind the 2001 Roadless Area Conservation Rule 
(2001 Roadless Rule) (66 FR 3244, 36 CFR Subpart B (2001)), which 
prohibits road construction, road reconstruction, and timber harvesting 
in inventoried roadless areas, with limited exceptions. State-specific 
roadless rules for Idaho and Colorado at 36 CFR 294

[[Page 42180]]

Subparts C and D will be retained and are excluded from this notice. 
Rescinding the 2001 Roadless Rule is intended to return decision making 
for road construction, road reconstruction, and timber harvesting in 
inventoried roadless areas to local officials, in conjunction with 
Forest-level land management planning. As directed by Executive Order 
14153: Unleashing Alaska's Extraordinary Resource Potential, the 
proposed rule will expressly exclude the Tongass National Forest from 
the 2001 Roadless Rule. The EIS will evaluate the impacts of the 
proposed rule rescission and study alternatives for roadless area 
conservation on National Forest System lands, including the Tongass 
National Forest, in the context of multiple use resource management. 
USDA invites written comments on alternatives or effects and on 
relevant information, studies, or analyses with respect to the 
proposal.

DATES: Comments must be received in writing by September 19, 2025. The 
proposed rule, accompanied by a draft EIS, is expected by March 2026, 
along with a request for additional public comment. The final rule, 
EIS, and record of decision are expected to be released in late 2026.

ADDRESSES: Additional information, including the eventual publication 
of the EIS and record of decision, can be found on the following 
website: <a href="https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/planning/roadless">https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/planning/roadless</a>. 
Comments must be submitted via one of the following methods:
    <bullet> Electronically (preferred): Through the Federal 
eRulemaking Portal, <a href="https://www.regulations.gov">https://www.regulations.gov</a>, identified by docket 
number FS-2025-0001. Follow the instructions for submitting comments.
    <bullet> Mail: Hardcopy letters must be submitted to the Director, 
Ecosystem Management Coordination, 201 14th Street SW, Mailstop 1108, 
Washington, DC 20250-1124.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Brad Kinder, Acting Director, 
Ecosystem Management Coordination, at the following phone number: 202-
205-0650. Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing, or have a speech 
disability may call 711 to reach the Telecommunications Relay Service 
then provide the phone number of the person named as a point of contact 
for further information.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Background

Current Status of Inventoried Roadless Areas

    Today, inventoried roadless areas total approximately 58.2 million 
acres, or about 30 percent of all National Forest System lands. The 
2001 Roadless Rule applies to approximately 44.7 million acres of 
National Forest System lands, including about 9.3 million acres within 
the Tongass National Forest. The 44.7 million acres exclude 
approximately 9.3 million acres in Idaho and 4.2 million acres in 
Colorado, which are under state specific roadless rules. Current areas 
are reflected on national maps at the Forest Service Roadless Area 
website (<a href="https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/planning/roadless">https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/planning/roadless</a>).
    More than 95 percent of inventoried roadless areas managed under 
the 2001 Roadless Rule (outside of Colorado and Idaho) are in ten 
Western states, including (from largest inventoried roadless area 
acreage to smallest): Alaska, Montana, California, Utah, Wyoming, 
Nevada, Washington, Oregon, New Mexico, and Arizona. Sixty-three 
percent are forested areas (with at least 10 percent canopy cover). 
Congress has included approximately 1.3 million acres (or 2.8 percent) 
of inventoried roadless areas managed under the 2001 Roadless Rule in 
the National Wilderness Preservation System.
    While they are referred to as `roadless', because of the history of 
their inventory and designation, there are thousands of miles of 
existing roads within lands designated under the 2001 Roadless Rule, 
including National Forest System roads as well as county, state, or 
other ownerships. About half of these lands are within 1 mile of a road 
and 31 percent are within 0.5 miles of a road (13.3 million acres).
    Between 1984 and 2024, 13 percent of inventoried roadless areas 
(5.5 million acres) experienced high or moderate severity wildfire. The 
occurrence of moderate- to high-severity fire in inventoried roadless 
areas has increased in recent decades, especially since 2000, 
consistent with trends throughout the National Forest System. 
Currently, forty percent of lands within inventoried roadless areas 
have a high or very-high wildfire hazard potential, ranging from 5 
percent in the Eastern Region to 60 percent in California. About 23 
percent (10.2 million acres) of inventoried roadless areas managed 
under the 2001 Roadless Rule are within the wildland-urban interface 
(WUI), areas where human development intermixes with the wildland, 
based on the definition of WUI set out in the Healthy Forests 
Restoration Act of 2003 (16 U.S.C. 6511(16)). An additional 4.8 million 
areas are within one mile of the WUI, totaling about 35 percent of 
these inventoried roadless area acres.
    The 2001 Roadless Rule Final EIS predicted that extensive fire 
reduction work would not be needed within inventoried roadless areas 
for at least 20 years. In the 24 years since that analysis, the area 
encompassing the WUI has increased alongside increased insect and 
disease and wildfire activity throughout the National Forest System, 
including within inventoried roadless areas. Insect and disease and 
wildfire activity, especially within the WUI, affects important 
resources, neighboring infrastructure, and communities. Additional 
information is available at the Forest Service Roadless Area website 
(<a href="https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/planning/roadless">https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/planning/roadless</a>).

Relationship of the 2001 Roadless Rule to Land Management Planning and 
Project-Level Decisions

    The relationship between regulations, land management plans, and 
national forest projects is of particular importance. A land management 
plan, developed under the National Forest Management Act and the 
Planning Rule at 36 CFR 219, provides a framework for future project 
analysis and decision making. All land management plans conform to 
existing laws and regulations and are administratively changed as 
needed to conform to new statutory and regulatory requirements (36 CFR 
219.1(f) and 219.13(c)).
    The 2001 Roadless Rule did not amend, revise, or compel amendment 
or revision of any land management plans (36 CFR 294.14(b) (2001); 66 
FR 3273); however, the Roadless Rule's provisions supersede the plan 
components for inventoried roadless areas applied through individual 
land management plans. The Forest Service planning directives (Forest 
Service Handbook (FSH) 1909.12, Chapter 24, updated in 2015) require 
land management plans to treat inventoried roadless areas as a type of 
designated area, with the option to also identify these areas as unique 
geographic areas or management areas in the plans. Plans may also 
include additional plan components for inventoried roadless areas if 
they are compatible with the restrictions of the applicable roadless 
rule. Within land management plans, inventoried roadless areas 
currently overlap on some national forests with other management areas, 
such as core habitats, research natural areas, alpine areas, or areas 
managed for backcountry recreation where there are expected to be low

[[Page 42181]]

levels of development, including timber harvest and road construction. 
For example, 3.1 million acres managed under the 2001 Roadless Rule are 
also managed as recommended wilderness, and 6.5 million acres are 
managed as backcountry.
    All site-specific project decisions must be consistent with land 
management plans. Any site-specific impacts on inventoried roadless 
areas and other resources must be analyzed, including National 
Environmental Policy Act compliance prior to a decision. Project 
decisions must comply with applicable Federal and State laws, such as 
the Clean Water Act, the Clean Air Act, Endangered Species Act, 
National Historic Preservation Act, and the Wilderness Act.

2001 Roadless Rule Implementation

    Amid legal challenges to the 2001 Roadless Rule and to provide for 
consistent application, exceptions for specific activities in 
inventoried roadless areas (294.12(b) and 294.13(b)), were reviewed and 
authorized by the Secretary and Forest Service Chief until 2012. In 
2012, certain exceptions were delegated to the applicable Regional 
Forester. Since 2018 all exceptions have been delegated to the Regional 
Forester. Approval requires review and documentation, including maps 
and justification. The use of exceptions has been limited, and the 
majority have been for forest stewardship purposes.

Purpose and Need for the Proposed Action

    Given changing resource conditions and shifts in policy priorities, 
the Department believes that the ``one-size-fits-all'' approach to 
roadless area management under the 2001 Roadless Rule is no longer 
appropriate and proposes to use local land management planning 
processes to administer inventoried roadless areas. Rescinding the 2001 
Roadless Rule would provide discretion for local land managers to 
tailor management, as appropriate, to local land conditions.
    Under the current Administration, the USDA has refocused policies, 
programs, and resources on increasing rural economic opportunity, 
decreasing Federal regulation, and streamlining Federal government 
services. Specifically, this deregulatory action is proposed pursuant 
to Executive Order 14192, Unleashing Prosperity Through Deregulation, 
to alleviate unnecessary regulatory burdens. In Executive Order 14225, 
Immediate Expansion of American Timber Production, and Executive Order 
14154, Unleashing American Energy, the President declared that the 
United States' national and economic security are currently threatened 
by our Nation's reliance upon foreign timber, energy and mineral 
production, and that it is imperative for the United States to take 
immediate action to facilitate domestic production of these natural 
resources to the maximum possible extent. As such, USDA is examining 
regulations that pose undue burden on production of the Nation's timber 
and identification, development, and use of domestic energy and mineral 
resources. This action is also being proposed in accordance with 
Executive Order 14153, Unleashing Alaska's Extraordinary Resource 
Potential, section 3(c), which directs that the Secretary of 
Agriculture ``shall reinstate'' the 2020 Alaska Roadless Rule (85 FR 
68688) which exempted the Tongass National Forest from the 2001 
Roadless Rule.
    As resource conditions and policies have evolved over time, it is 
now evident that the blanket, national approach taken in the 2001 
Roadless Rule unnecessarily and adversely limits exercise of management 
discretion. The flexibility to respond to local land and resource 
conditions is paramount.
    Conditions within and adjacent to National Forest System lands have 
dramatically changed over the twenty-four years since the 2001 Roadless 
Rule was published and are expected to continue to change, including 
the expanding wildland-urban interface; growing impacts of extreme 
wildfire, drought, and insect and disease infestations; and continuing 
deferred maintenance needs on National Forest System roads and trails. 
Management flexibility is needed for the Agency to achieve its multiple 
use conservation mission, including timber production, recreation, 
wildfire suppression, and fuel reduction treatments. These needs are 
magnified by the emphasis on domestic timber and energy production on 
Federal lands and deregulation policies reflected in Executive Orders 
14192, 14225, 14154, as well as Secretary's Memorandum 1078-006, 
Increasing Timber Production and Designating an Emergency Situation on 
National Forest System Lands. The USDA is cognizant that the 
President's recent Orders have significantly changed the context in 
which the USDA Forest Service administers these lands for the benefits 
of all Americans. Local decision making and active land management 
benefit not only the communities that rely on national forests for 
jobs, natural resources, open spaces, forage, and clean water, but all 
citizens who utilize the multiple use attributes of national forests.
    Given these national policy priorities and changing conditions, the 
Department has determined the 2001 Roadless Rule is no longer the best 
approach to managing inventoried roadless areas within the National 
Forest System. Managing inventoried roadless areas to maintain their 
roadless character through a national rule no longer facilitates the 
maintenance of the long-term health and productivity. A national rule 
adds administrative burden and does not efficiently support multiple 
use management of National Forest System lands. This action seeks to 
reinstate a reliance upon the flexibility of the local land management 
planning process. The proposed rule responds to the need for national 
forests to take swift and immediate action to reduce wildfire risk and 
help protect surrounding communities and infrastructure. It would allow 
local managers, as deemed appropriate and consistent with land 
management plans, to build roads and implement active forest management 
practices (for example, timber sales and thinning) in inventoried 
roadless areas. Combined with the complex social and resource issues, 
the litigation and legislative history surrounding inventoried roadless 
area conservation demonstrates that while differences in opinion seem 
inevitable, various active management options responding to changing 
local land conditions are available where needed.
    Land management plans and Agency directives provide a comprehensive 
framework with respect to inventoried roadless area decision making. 
Eliminating a cumbersome national level oversight process and returning 
authority to the local decisionmakers provides for efficiency as well 
as effectiveness for resource conservation. The important resource 
values of inventoried roadless areas can be effectively conserved 
through local decision making and planning without restrictive and 
unnecessary national prohibitions.

Preliminary Description of Proposed Action

    The USDA proposes to rescind the 2001 Roadless Area Conservation 
Rule (66 FR 3244, 36 CFR Subpart B (2001)) on 44.7 million acres, 
including the Tongass National Forest, but maintain state-specific 
roadless conservation rules for Idaho and Colorado (36 CFR Subparts C 
and D). As directed by Executive Order 14153: Unleashing Alaska's 
Extraordinary Resource Potential, the proposed rule will expressly 
exclude the Tongass National Forest from the 2001 Roadless Rule. If

[[Page 42182]]

adopted, management of inventoried roadless areas would be governed by 
applicable land management plan direction.
    The proposed action would rescind the prohibitions set forth in the 
2001 Roadless Rule. Local land management planning, guided by public 
input and information on land conditions, would provide the basis for 
conservation of inventoried roadless areas. The proposed rule would not 
compel amendment or revision of any land management plan, though plans 
may be amended in any manner whatsoever, and are revised periodically 
(16 U.S.C. 1604(f)).
    The proposed rescission of the 2001 Roadless Rule would not 
authorize any specific ground-disturbing activities or projects, nor 
does it propose any increase in the overall amount of timber harvested 
or roads constructed; require any timber harvest or road construction; 
or dictate when, where, or how such activities may occur in the future. 
These decisions are left to the local officials through site-specific 
analysis and evaluation of land and resource conditions and would be 
consistent with applicable plan provisions. The proposed rule would not 
alter existing regulatory requirements for environmental analysis, 
public engagement, or administrative review.

Preliminary Description of Known Alternatives

    In addition to the proposed action, the EIS will analyze a `no 
action' alternative that would retain the 2001 Roadless Rule.

Preliminary List of Substantive Issues and Summary of Expected Impacts

    The EIS will evaluate the potential social, economic, and 
environmental programmatic effects resulting from the implementation of 
the alternatives described above. Substantive issues are those that 
meaningfully inform the consideration of reasonably foreseeable impacts 
of the proposed action or a decision on the alternative selected for 
implementation (7 CFR 1b.11). The following preliminary substantive 
issues are anticipated to be evaluated. The EIS will evaluate the 
anticipated impacts and benefits, including reasonably foreseeable 
impacts, related to:
    <bullet> Public access to National Forest System lands, including 
for recreation, to facilitate subsistence or other uses, and to 
exercise legal rights.
    <bullet> Forest health and management, including timber management, 
fuels management, and fire suppression.
    <bullet> Soil, water and air; plant and animal communities, 
including threatened, endangered, sensitive species; scenic integrity; 
recreation settings and opportunities; and cultural resources, 
traditional cultural properties, and sacred sites.
    <bullet> Local and regional economies.
    The level of environmental review of the identified resources for 
the EIS will be commensurate with the anticipated effects to each 
resource. Because the proposed rule does not propose to compel changes 
to land management plans or initiate development of specific activities 
within currently inventoried roadless areas, it is uncertain if there 
would be any future project-level decisions, and what those decisions 
might entail. Effects of any future actions will be considered at 
Forest or project-level scales where site-specific details of a 
specific action and the resources it affects can be meaningfully 
evaluated and weighed, subject to their land management plans and 
environmental analysis processes.

Cooperating and Participating Agencies

    The USDA Forest Service is the lead agency. No Cooperating or 
Participating Agencies have been designated. The USDA Forest Service 
does not anticipate designating any Federal, State, Tribal, or local 
agencies as cooperating or participating agencies. These organizations 
are encouraged to provide input through the public comment 
opportunities for this notice of intent, as well as the proposed rule 
and draft EIS.

Responsible Official

    The Responsible Official is the Secretary of Agriculture or her 
designee.

Request for Public Comments

    Comments received on this notice of intent will guide the 
development of the EIS. The Agency is requesting comments on 
alternatives or effects and on relevant information, studies, or 
analyses with respect to the proposal. Follow the instructions for 
sending comments (see ADDRESSES section above).
    It is important that reviewers provide their comments at such times 
and in such a manner that they are useful to the Agency's preparation 
of the EIS; therefore, comments should be provided prior to the close 
of the comment period and should clearly articulate the reviewer's 
concerns and contentions. When lengthy or complex comments are 
provided, they are most effective if a brief, plainly worded summary of 
the main points is included. Comments, including attachments and any 
personal information provided in your comments, will be posted to the 
docket unchanged. Do not submit any information you consider to be 
private, Confidential Business Information (CBI), or other information, 
the disclosure of which is restricted by statute.
    This action is not subject to the pre-decisional administrative 
review (objection) process of 36 CFR 218 or 219.
    Tribal governments and Alaska Native Corporations will have an 
opportunity to be engaged during rulemaking and EIS development through 
various coordination and consultation events.

Anticipated Permits or Other Authorizations

    No anticipated permits or other authorizations are required for 
this action.

Brooke Rollins,
Secretary of Agriculture.
[FR Doc. 2025-16581 Filed 8-28-25; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3411-15-P


</pre></body>
</html>