<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 84 Issue 190 (Tuesday, October 1, 2019)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 84, Number 190 (Tuesday, October 1, 2019)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 51939-51942]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2019-20570]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Agricultural Marketing Service

7 CFR Part 51

[Document Number AMS-SC-18-0055, SC-18-330]


U.S. Standards for Grades of Apples

AGENCY: Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) of the Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) is amending the U.S. Standards for Grades of Apples 
by removing smooth net-like russeting as a grade-determining factor in 
the U.S. Extra Fancy, U.S. Fancy, and U.S. No. 1 grades for Fuji 
apples. In addition, AMS is removing obsolete references to the 
location where color standards may be examined and purchased. The 
changes modernize the standards and meet consumer demand by providing 
greater marketing flexibility.

DATES: Effective October 31, 2019.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: David G. Horner, Agricultural 
Marketing Specialist, USDA, AMS, Specialty Crops Program, Specialty 
Crops Inspection Division, 100 Riverside Parkway, Suite 101, 
Fredericksburg VA, 22406; phone (540) 361-1120; fax (540) 361-1199; or, 
email <a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#fdb99c8b98d3b5928f93988fbd888e999cd39a928b"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="e8ac899e8dc6a0879a868d9aa89d9b8c89c68f879e">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>. Copies of the revised U.S. Standards for 
Apples are available at <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a> or on the AMS 
website at <a href="https://www.ams.usda.gov/grades-standards/fruits">https://www.ams.usda.gov/grades-standards/fruits</a>.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The changes exempt Fuji apples from smooth 
net-like russeting as a grade-determining factor. These revisions also 
affect the grade requirements under the Export Apple Act.

Executive Orders 12866, 13771, and 13563

    This rule does not meet the definition of a significant regulatory 
action contained in section 3(f) of Executive Order 12866, and is not 
subject to review by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). Because 
this rule does not meet the definition of a significant regulatory 
action, it does not trigger the requirements in Executive Order 13771. 
See OMB's Memorandum titled ``Interim Guidance Implementing Section 2 
of the Executive Order of January 30, 2017, titled `Reducing Regulation 
and Controlling Regulatory Costs' '' (February 2, 2017). Executive 
Orders 12866 and 13563 direct agencies to assess all costs and benefits 
of

[[Page 51940]]

available regulatory alternatives and, if regulation is necessary, to 
select regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits (including 
potential economic, environmental, public health and safety effects, 
distributive impacts, and equity). Executive Order 13563 emphasizes the 
importance of quantifying both costs and benefits, reducing costs, 
harmonizing rules, and promoting flexibility.

Congressional Review Act

    Pursuant to the Congressional Review Act (5 U.S.C. 801 et seq.), 
the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs designated this rule 
as not a major rule, as defined by 5 U.S.C. 804(2).

Executive Order 13175

    This action has been reviewed in accordance with the requirements 
of Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian 
Tribal Governments. The review reveals that this regulation would not 
have substantial and direct effects on Tribal governments or 
significant Tribal implications.

Executive Order 12988

    This rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12988, Civil 
Justice Reform. It is not intended to have retroactive effect. There 
are no administrative procedures that must be exhausted prior to any 
judicial challenge to the provisions of this rule.

Background

    The current U.S. standards provide for apples to be sorted into 
various grades, including but not limited to U.S. Extra Fancy, U.S. 
Fancy, and U.S. No. 1. Each of the grades describes the qualities 
required for apples to meet the standards and those that are not to be 
scored against certain varieties of apples when determining grade. AMS 
proposed amending the U.S. standards for apples so that smooth net-like 
russeting of Fuji apples would not be scored in any grade (See 84 FR 
19743). Smooth net-like russeting is a cosmetic defect that affects the 
skin of the apple but not the internal quality of the fruit. Smooth 
net-like russeting, which is called flecking by the Pacific Northwest 
apple industry, is prevalent in the Fuji variety. U.S. apple standards 
restricted apples from exhibiting an aggregate area of smooth net-like 
russeting greater than 10 percent for U.S. Extra Fancy, 15 percent for 
U.S. Fancy, and 25 percent for U.S. No. 1 from meeting the grade 
requirements. The Export Apple Act regulations (7 CFR part 33) require 
that apples grade at least U.S. No. 1 or U.S. No. 1 Early (except 
apples for export to Pacific ports of Russia must grade at least U.S. 
Utility or U.S. No. 1 Hail for hail damaged apples, as specified in the 
U.S. Standards for Grades of Apples). Fuji apples that display smooth 
net-like russeting greater than the percentages allowed are therefore 
excluded from the export market due to current U.S. grade standards.
    The Washington State Grade Standards for Apples (16 W.A.C. 403) do 
not consider smooth net-like russeting to be a defect for Fuji apples 
if the russeting does not rise above the surface of the skin and the 
skin is not rough to the touch. Apples grown in Washington account for 
nearly 75 percent of domestic production and more than 90 percent of 
U.S. export apples. Revising the U.S. apple standards to exclude 
scoring of smooth net-like russeting on Fuji apples as a quality 
defect, in alignment with the Washington State standards, will promote 
consistency across the apple market and remove barriers to the export 
market for growers of the Fuji variety.
    In December 2016, the Northwest Horticultural Council (NHC) 
petitioned AMS to remove the requirement for scoring smooth net-like 
russeting from the U.S. Standards for Grades of Apples for the Fuji 
variety. In response, AMS asked the NHC to provide justification and 
evidence of industry support, which they did in a memorandum submitted 
in April 2018. The NHC provided research showing that Fuji apples have 
a propensity for smooth net-like russeting and that the feature does 
not negatively affect the internal quality of the fruit. In addition, 
the NHC stated that revising the U.S. apple standards would partially 
harmonize them with the Washington State apple standards, and help 
prevent sound Fuji apples from being rejected in domestic and 
international markets. The NHC petition was supported by the Washington 
Apple Commission, Idaho Apple Commission, California Apple Commission, 
and many other apple organizations. AMS conducted research on the 
proposal by meeting with Washington State and industry personnel in 
November 2018. Based on available data, AMS concluded that exempting 
Fuji apples from scoring smooth net-like russeting as a quality defect 
would provide the industry with greater flexibility, and align the U.S. 
standards with current state and industry practices.

Comments

    On May 6, 2019, AMS published a proposed rule in the Federal 
Register (84 FR 19743) soliciting comments on removing smooth net-like 
russeting as a grade-determining factor from the U.S. Extra Fancy, U.S. 
Fancy, and U.S. No. 1 grades for Fuji apples. In addition, AMS proposed 
removing obsolete references to the location where color standards may 
be examined and purchased. The comment period closed on July 5, 2019. 
Three comments were received; all supported the proposed revisions.
    One commenter was an association representing 7,500 apple growers 
throughout America as well as more than 400 individual firms involved 
in the apple business. They ``strongly support[ed]'' the revisions as 
they will remove an unnecessary obstacle to U.S.-grown Fuji apples 
accessing the global marketplace. Another commenter representing 
growers, shippers, and packers in the Pacific Northwest ``fully 
supported'' the proposed revisions and ``encourage[d] its swift 
adoption.'' The third commenter was anonymous and stated that the 
revisions were ``ideal'' since the changes would prevent sound apples 
from going to waste.
    Based on the information gathered, AMS is making the following 
revisions to the U.S. Standards for Grades of Apples:
    <bullet> Section 51.300 U.S. Extra Fancy: Revised to exempt the 
Fuji variety from scoring of smooth net-like russeting as a defect.
    <bullet> Section 51.301 U.S. Fancy: Revised to exempt the Fuji 
variety from scoring of smooth net-like russeting as a defect.
    <bullet> Section 51.302 U.S. No. 1: Revised to exempt the Fuji 
variety from scoring of smooth net-like russeting as a defect. The 
revision of the U.S. No. 1 grade also will affect the U.S. No. 1 Hail 
(Sec.  51.302(a)) grade and the permitted combination grades (Sec.  
51.304).
    <bullet> Section 51.305 Color Requirements: Revised to remove 
obsolete references to the location where color standards may be 
examined and purchased.

Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

    Pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Regulatory 
Flexibility Act (RFA) (5 U.S.C. 601-612), AMS has considered the 
economic impacts of the revision to the U.S. Standards for Grades of 
Apples (7 CFR 51.300-51.322). The purpose of the RFA is to structure 
regulatory actions such that small businesses will not be unduly or 
disproportionately burdened. Accordingly, AMS has prepared this 
regulatory flexibility analysis.
    The revision will result in a minor change to the current U.S. 
standards to allow smooth net-like russeting of the Fuji variety of 
apple. There will be little

[[Page 51941]]

or no additional cost to implement this revision.
    According to the Small Business Administration (SBA) (13 CFR 
121.601), the definition of a small apple producer is one whose annual 
sales are less than $750,000. Based on this definition, data from the 
2012 Agricultural Census show that at least 94 percent of farm 
operations that produce apples are considered small. These small 
growers will not be disproportionately affected by the rule as all 
changes to the standard will be applied uniformly on all market 
participants.
    The proposal for the change to the U.S. Standards for Grades of 
Apples was submitted by the NHC, which represents apple growers, 
packers, and shippers in Washington, Oregon, and Idaho who account for 
75 percent of domestic fresh apple production. This proposal was 
reviewed by the U.S. Apple Association and the U.S. Apple Export 
Council. The addition of smooth net-like russeting to the list of 
features that are not scorable against Fuji apples in the U.S. 
Standards for Grades of Apples will promote consistency in apple 
grading, increase U.S. Fuji apple access into export markets, and 
provide for greater price stability for the Fuji variety of apples.

List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 51

    Food grades and standards, Fruits, Nuts, Reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements, Vegetables.

    For reasons set forth in the preamble, 7 CFR part 51 is amended as 
follows:

PART 51--[AMENDED]

0
1. The authority citation for part 51 continues to read as follows:

    Authority:  7 U.S.C. 1621--1627.


0
2. Revise Sec.  51.300 to read as follows:


Sec.  51.300  U.S. Extra Fancy.

    ``U.S. Extra Fancy'' consists of apples of one variety (except when 
more than one variety is printed on the container) which are mature but 
not overripe, clean, fairly well formed, free from decay, internal 
browning, internal breakdown, soft scald, scab, freezing injury, 
visible watercore, and broken skins. The apples are also free from 
injury caused by bruises, brown surface discoloration, smooth net-like 
russeting, sunburn or sprayburn, limb rubs, hail, drought spots, scars, 
disease, insects, or other means. The apples are free from damage 
caused by bitter pit or Jonathan spot and by smooth solid, slightly 
rough or rough russeting, or stem or calyx cracks, as well as damage by 
invisible watercore after January 31st of the year following the year 
of production except for the Fuji variety of apples. Invisible 
watercore and smooth net-like russeting shall not be scored against the 
Fuji variety of apples under any circumstances. For the apple varieties 
listed in table 1 of Sec.  51.305, each apple of this grade has the 
amount of color specified for the variety. (See Sec. Sec.  51.305 and 
51.306.)

0
3. Revise Sec.  51.301 to read as follows:


Sec.  51.301  U.S. Fancy.

    ``U.S. Fancy'' consists of apples of one variety (except when more 
than one variety is printed on the container) which are mature but not 
overripe, clean, fairly well formed, and free from decay, internal 
browning, internal breakdown, soft scald, freezing injury, visible 
watercore, and broken skins. The apples are also free from damage 
caused by bruises, brown surface discoloration, russeting, sunburn or 
sprayburn, limb rubs, hail, drought spots, scars, stem or calyx cracks, 
disease, insects, bitter pit, Jonathan spot, or damage by other means, 
or invisible watercore after January 31st of the year following the 
year of production, except for the Fuji variety of apples. Invisible 
watercore and smooth net-like russeting shall not be scored against the 
Fuji variety of apples under any circumstances. For the apple varieties 
listed in table 1 of Sec.  51.305, each apple of this grade has the 
amount of color specified for the variety. (See Sec. Sec.  51.305 and 
51.306.)

0
4. Amend Sec.  51.302 by revising the introductory text to read as 
follows:


Sec.  51.302  U.S. No. 1.

    ``U.S. No. 1'' consists of apples which meet the requirements of 
U.S. Fancy grade except for color, russeting, and invisible water core. 
In this grade, less color is required for all varieties listed in table 
1 of Sec.  51.305. Apples of this grade are free from excessive damage 
caused by russeting which means that apples meet the russeting 
requirements for U.S. Fancy as defined under the definitions of 
``damage by russeting,'' except the aggregate area of an apple which 
may be covered by smooth net-like russeting shall not exceed 25 
percent; and the aggregate area of an apple which may be covered by 
smooth solid russeting shall not exceed 10 percent: Provided, That, in 
the case of the Yellow Newtown or similar varieties, the aggregate area 
of an apple which may be covered with smooth solid russeting shall not 
exceed 20 percent; and that smooth net-like russeting shall not be 
scored against the Fuji variety under any circumstances. Each apple of 
this grade has the amount of color specified in Sec.  51.305 for the 
variety. Invisible watercore shall not be scored in this grade. (See 
Sec. Sec.  51.305 and 51.306.)
* * * * *

0
5. In Sec.  51.305, remove the two undesignated introductory paragraphs 
and add paragraphs (a) and (b) in their place to read as follows:


Sec.  51.305  Color requirements.

    (a) In addition to the requirements specified for the grades set 
forth in Sec. Sec.  51.300 through 51.304, apples of these grades shall 
have the percentage of color specified for the variety in table 1 of 
this section. All apple varieties other than those appearing in table 1 
of this section shall have no color requirements pertaining to these 
grades. For the solid red varieties, the percentage stated refers to 
the area of the surface which must be covered with a good shade of 
solid red characteristic of the variety: Provided, That an apple having 
color of a lighter shade of solid red or striped red than that 
considered as a good shade of red characteristic of the variety may be 
admitted to a grade, provided it has sufficient additional area covered 
so that the apple has as good an appearance as one with the minimum 
percentage of good red characteristic of the variety required for the 
grade. For the striped red varieties, the percentage stated refers to 
the area of the surface in which the stripes of a good shade of red 
characteristic of the variety shall predominate over stripes of lighter 
red, green, or yellow. However, an apple having color of a lighter 
shade than that considered as a good shade of red characteristic of the 
variety may be admitted to a grade, provided it has sufficient 
additional area covered so that the apple has as good an appearance as 
one with the minimum percentage of stripes of a good red characteristic 
of the variety required for the grade. Faded brown stripes shall not be 
considered as color.
    (b) Color standards USDA Visual Aid APL-CC-1 (Plates a-e) consists 
of a folder containing the color requirements for apples set forth in 
paragraph (a) of this section and five plates illustrating minimum good 
shade of solid red or striped red color, minimum compensating color and 
shade not considered color, for the following 12 varieties: Red 
Delicious, Red Rome, Empire, Idared, Winesap, Jonathan, Stayman, 
McIntosh, Cortland, Rome Beauty, Delicious, and York. The color 
standards are available for purchase at <a href="http://www.ams.usda.gov">http://www.ams.usda.gov</a>.
* * * * *


[[Page 51942]]


    Dated: September 18, 2019.
Bruce Summers,
Administrator, Agricultural Marketing Service.
[FR Doc. 2019-20570 Filed 9-30-19; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3410-02-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>