<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 90 Issue 179 (Thursday, September 18, 2025)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 179 (Thursday, September 18, 2025)]
[Notices]
[Pages 45032-45036]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2025-18058]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY


Accelerating Speed to Power/Winning the Artificial Intelligence 
Race: Federal Action To Rapidly Expand Grid Capacity and Enable 
Electricity Demand Growth

AGENCY: Grid Deployment Office, Department of Energy.

ACTION: Request for information.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: Projected electricity demand growth from data centers, 
advanced manufacturing facilities, semiconductor fabrication plants, 
and other large energy users is outpacing the capacity of the existing 
electric grid. The Department of Energy (DOE) is inviting public input 
and seeking detailed information via this request for

[[Page 45033]]

information (RFI) from state energy offices, public utility 
commissions, electric utilities, regional transmission organizations 
and independent system operators, transmission and generation 
developers, large energy users, and other stakeholders on large-scale 
generation, transmission, and grid infrastructure projects that can 
accelerate speed to power to support manufacturing, industrial, and 
artificial intelligence/data center electricity demand growth. In 
addition, DOE is requesting stakeholder input on how to best utilize 
its funding programs and authorities to rapidly expand energy 
generation and transmission grid capacity to meet electricity demand 
growth across the country in a reliable and affordable manner.

DATES: Responses to the RFI must be received by 5:00 p.m. (ET) on 
November 21, 2025.

ADDRESSES: Responses must be submitted electronically to 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#4d1e3d28282939221d223a283f1f0b040d253c63292228632a223b"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="4a193a2f2f2e3e251a253d2f38180c030a223b642e252f642d253c">[email&#160;protected]</span></a> with the subject line: ``RFI Response--
Accelerating Speed to Power''.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: David Parsons, (240) 474-2279, 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#ca99baafafaebea59aa5bdafb8988c838aa2bbe4aea5afe4ada5bc"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="114261747475657e417e6674634357585179603f757e743f767e67">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

I. Background

    Large-scale electricity demand growth is occurring at a pace and 
scale that presents significant challenges to the U.S. electric grid. 
In several regions, planned and proposed data centers, semiconductor 
fabrication plants, manufacturing facilities, and other large loads are 
driving multi-gigawatt increases in electric demand. Many of these new 
loads are highly location-specific, have accelerated timelines, and 
depend on rapid interconnection of reliable electricity supply.
    This growth has exposed gaps in existing infrastructure, including 
limited transmission capacity, grid congestion, aging grid 
infrastructure, and delays in interconnection processes for both load 
and new generation. Long-lead times for transmission and generation 
development, along with regulatory, permitting, planning, and 
operational challenges, are threatening the ability of critical 
projects to meet demand.
    President Trump has issued several executive orders related to 
energy dominance and AI, aiming to establish American leadership on 
these issues:
    <bullet> Executive Order 14154: Unleashing American Energy (Jan. 
20, 2025): This order establishes a policy to protect the United 
States's economic and national security and military preparedness by 
ensuring that an abundant supply of reliable energy is readily 
accessible in every state and territory of the Nation.
    <bullet> Executive Order 14179: Removing Barriers to American 
Leadership in Artificial Intelligence (Jan. 23, 2025): This order 
establishes a policy of the United States to sustain and enhance 
America's global artificial intelligence (AI) dominance in order to 
promote human flourishing, economic competitiveness, and national 
security.
    <bullet> Executive Order 14262: Strengthening the Reliability and 
Security of the United States Electric Grid (April 8, 2025): This order 
focuses on strengthening the reliability and security of the U.S. 
electric grid to meet growing electricity demand.
    <bullet> Executive Order 14302: Reinvigorating America's Nuclear 
Industrial Base (May 23, 2025): This order establishes a policy of the 
United States to expedite and promote to the fullest possible extent 
the production and operation of nuclear energy to provide affordable, 
reliable, safe, and secure energy to the American people.
    In support of these policies, DOE is considering actions to 
strengthen the Federal role in accelerating critical generation and 
transmission projects to ensure the electric grid can accommodate and 
enable this growth.

Infrastructure Projects

    DOE seeks to identify large-scale generation, transmission, and 
grid infrastructure projects that can accelerate speed to power to 
support manufacturing, industrial, and AI/data center electricity 
demand growth and would benefit from DOE coordination, technical 
assistance, and financial support. Specifically, DOE is seeking to 
identify projects that:
    <bullet> Enable a minimum incremental load of 3 gigawatt (GW).
    <bullet> Support up to 20 GW of incremental load.
    <bullet> Include, but are not limited to:
    [cir] New inter-regional transmission to support incremental load 
serving capability (must be at least 1,000 MVA);
    [cir] Reconductoring of existing lines to support incremental load 
serving capability (must be at least 500 MVA);
    [cir] Bringing retired thermal generation facilities back into 
service or otherwise using the existing interconnection capacity to 
provide reliable power generation; and
    [cir] Construction of new generation or portfolios of new 
generation assets.

DOE Funding Programs and Authorities

    In addition, DOE administers a number of funding programs and 
authorities that may be leveraged to support grid infrastructure, power 
system investments, and expansion of generation, transmission, and 
distribution capacity to serve large electric loads.
    These programs and authorities include:
    <bullet> Transmission Facilitation Program (TFP): The Grid 
Deployment Office administers borrowing authority to support the build 
out of new interregional transmission lines across the country, 
authorized by 42 U.S.C. 18713. Through this program, DOE serves as an 
``anchor customer'' by entering into capacity contracts for new, 
upgraded, or expanded transmission lines. Through the TFP, DOE takes 
long-term financial positions in transmission capacity to de-risk large 
transmission projects and help overcome the financial hurdles in the 
development of large-scale new transmission lines and upgrading 
existing transmission.
    <bullet> Grid Resilience and Innovation Partnerships (GRIP) 
Program: GRIP provides funding to enhance optimization and accelerate 
the deployment of transformative projects that strengthen the 
reliability and resilience of power system infrastructure, authorized 
by 42 U.S.C. 17386,18711, and 18712. DOE offers competitive funding to 
support transmission projects, improve system optimization, and deploy 
advanced grid technologies. Eligible activities include substation 
upgrades, grid hardening, advanced control systems, and innovative 
approaches to enhance reliability and improve transmission, storage, 
and other regional energy infrastructure.
    <bullet> Loans and Loan Guarantees: DOE's Loan Programs Office 
(LPO) administers a portfolio of energy projects and advanced 
technology facilities across the country through Title 17 and other 
authorities supporting grid infrastructure and electricity generation 
projects, including high-voltage transmission, generation, grid 
upgrades, and integrated systems that support load growth.
    <bullet> Technical Assistance: DOE also provides key decision-
makers and electric industry stakeholders with technical assistance and 
access to advanced modeling and analytical capabilities of the DOE 
National Laboratories to address grid modernization and infrastructure 
investment challenges.
    Through this RFI, DOE seeks to develop and refine Federal funding 
and technical assistance programs to help state and local governments, 
utilities, grid operators, large load customers, and other stakeholders 
address grid

[[Page 45034]]

infrastructure constraints and meet new demand in a timely and 
efficient manner.

II. RFI Questions

    DOE requests the interested parties provide the requested 
information and answers to the questions below. DOE also encourages 
respondents to submit data, case studies, or other available materials 
that provide actionable insight to support this RFI.

1. Large-Scale Generation and Transmission Projects To Enable Load 
Growth

    a. Please identify any specific large-scale generation, 
transmission, and grid infrastructure proposed projects (under 
development, in planning, or construction-ready) that should be 
considered and prioritized by DOE for siting and permitting support, 
technical assistance, and/or Federal funding (see Section V of this 
document, ``Confidential Business Information,'' regarding protection 
of information and how to submit confidential or proprietary 
information). Please include detailed project information for each 
project, including but not limited to:
    i. Project region, name, geographical location, and description, 
including detailed maps or geospatial data of the project, if 
available.
    ii. Project type and size (e.g., 100-mile 500 kV transmission line, 
1.1 GW nuclear plant, 20 GW data center/grid corridor, etc.).
    iii. Current development stage (e.g., conceptual, environmental 
planning and permitting, financing, construction-ready).
    iv. A description of how the project is critical to meeting 
confirmed or anticipated large electric loads.
    v. A description of how DOE financial assistance, loan guarantees, 
or technical assistance could support the project.
    vi. Estimated cost and project timeline.
    vii. Any prior tribal engagements (if applicable).
    viii. Size and characteristics of the load(s) the project is 
intended to serve.
    ix. Likely clients/project partners.
    x. Amount of funding/capital raised.
    xi. Siting and permitting status.
    xii. Interconnection status.
    xiii. A description of any Federal, state, or local barriers or 
dependences to project completion.
    xiv. A description of whether the project has engaged with any DOE 
programs (e.g., LPO financing, GRIP, TFP, etc.).

2. High-Priority Geographic Areas for Targeted DOE Investment

    DOE is interested in identifying geographic areas or zones where 
targeted Federal investment in transmission, generation, or grid 
infrastructure could unlock or accelerate large-scale economic activity 
tied to electric load growth. These may include regions experiencing 
substantial near-term demand from data centers, manufacturing, or other 
large load users, as well as areas with untapped development potential 
constrained by inadequate grid infrastructure.
    a. Are there specific geographic areas or high-priority zones 
(e.g., data center corridors, semiconductor clusters, industrial parks, 
port complexes, etc.) where:
    i. Major electric loads are expected or already committed?
    ii. Grid constraints (transmission, generation, or other grid 
infrastructure) are limiting or delaying economic development?
    iii. DOE investment (financial assistance, loan guarantees, siting 
and permitting support, technical assistance, etc.) could be targeted 
to unlock high-value or private investment?
    b. For each specific high-priority zone, please identify the 
characteristics of the geographic area that support prioritization by 
DOE, including:
    i. Amount of confirmed or anticipated electric load.
    ii. Availability of energy supply and electricity generation 
capacity.
    iii. Generation, transmission, or grid infrastructure projects in 
development that could serve large electric loads.
    iv. Grid constraints that may be alleviated with DOE investment and 
technical assistance.
    v. Existence of other infrastructure to support build out (e.g., 
water resources, telecommunications, etc.).
    vi. Any existing planning efforts by states, local jurisdictions, 
electric utilities, grid operators to identify and designate investment 
zones or corridors.

3. Use of DOE Funding, Financing, and Technical Assistance

    a. In what specific ways can DOE support the development and 
deployment of large-scale generation and transmission projects? Please 
provide concrete examples and suggestions in areas such as:
    i. Financial incentives (e.g., grants, loans, tax credits, etc.).
    ii. Technical assistance and expertise.
    iii. Research and development.
    iv. Streamlining environmental review and permitting processes.
    v. Facilitating stakeholder collaboration.
    vi. Addressing supply chain and workforce vulnerabilities.
    b. What specific authorities, programs, or initiatives within DOE 
are best positioned to provide this support?
    c. How should DOE prioritize or structure its financial and 
technical support to advance high-impact generation, transmission, and 
grid infrastructure projects to serve large electric loads?
    i. How can Federal support best de-risk early-stage infrastructure 
investment to attract private or other public capital?
    d. Are there gaps in capital availability (e.g., for utilities, 
project developers, or certain types of infrastructure) that DOE 
funding could help bridge?
    e. What forms of technical assistance or planning support (e.g., 
power flow modeling, capacity expansion planning, load forecasting, 
interconnection studies, technology operational assessments, technology 
implementation roadmaps, etc.) would help states, utilities, and 
project developers more effectively use Federal funding to meet demand?
    f. How should DOE coordinate funding across its offices to support 
large-scale electric load growth?
    g. What additional coordination is needed between DOE and other 
Federal agencies (e.g., U.S. Department of Agriculture, Department of 
Commerce, Department of Interior, Environmental Protection Agency, the 
Department of Defense, Department of the Treasury, Department of 
Transportation, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, etc.) to 
align funding, permitting, or policy with emerging electric load 
challenges?
    i. Are there successful examples of interagency coordination that 
should be expanded to address grid capacity and load growth?
    h. How can DOE effectively leverage public-private partnerships to 
accelerate the development of these projects?
    i. What are the most critical data gaps or information needs that 
DOE should address to better understand and support these projects?

4. Load Growth Trends

    a. What types of new electric load are driving demand increases in 
your service area or region?
    b. Please provide any available projections or forecasts of the 
scale, timing, and location of this expected growth.

5. Grid Infrastructure Constraints

    a. What generation, transmission, or distribution constraints are 
limiting the ability to serve this demand?

[[Page 45035]]

    b. What are the primary challenges and barriers to expanding 
infrastructure and deploying large-scale generation and transmission 
projects? Please consider factors such as:
    i. Siting and permitting;
    ii. Financing and investment;
    iii. Construction timelines;
    iv. Supply chain constraints;
    v. Workforce availability;
    vi. Interconnection queues;
    vii. State and Federal regulatory and policy uncertainty;
    viii. Technology integration;
    ix. Community engagement and acceptance.

6. Additional Comments

    Please share any further insights, recommendations, or examples of 
effective practices related to grid infrastructure expansion to support 
large electric loads.

III. RFI Response Guidelines

    Responses to this RFI must be submitted electronically to 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#c390b3a6a6a7b7ac93acb4a6b191858a83abb2eda7aca6eda4acb5"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="d98aa9bcbcbdadb689b6aebcab8b9f9099b1a8f7bdb6bcf7beb6af">[email&#160;protected]</span></a> no later than 5:00 p.m. (ET) on November 21, 
2025. Responses must be provided as Portable Document Format (PDF) file 
attachments to an email. It is recommended that attachments with file 
sizes exceeding 25 MB be compressed (i.e., zipped) to ensure message 
delivery. PDF file attachments should be no more than 15 pages in 
length. Only electronic responses will be accepted.
    Please identify your answers by responding to a specific question 
or topic if applicable. Respondents may respond to as many or as few 
questions or topics as they wish. DOE will not respond to individual 
submissions or publish publicly a compendium of responses. A response 
to this RFI will not be viewed as a binding commitment to develop or 
pursue the project or ideas discussed.
    Respondents must provide the following information at the start of 
their response to this RFI:
    <bullet> Company/institution name;
    <bullet> Company/institution point of contact;
    <bullet> Contact's address, phone number, and email address;
    <bullet> Company/institution's primary area of expertise or focus 
relevant to this RFI (e.g., electricity generation, transmission, state 
energy policy, project development, etc.).

IV. Disclaimer

    This is a request for information only. This RFI does not 
constitute a funding opportunity, grant program, or regulatory 
proposal. This RFI is not accepting applications for financial 
assistance or financial incentives. DOE may or may not issue a Notice 
of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) based on consideration of the input 
received from this RFI.
    This RFI is not a NOFO; therefore, DOE is not accepting 
applications at this time. DOE may issue a NOFO in the future based on 
or related to the content and responses to this RFI; however, DOE may 
also elect not to issue a NOFO. There is no guarantee that a NOFO will 
be issued as a result of this RFI. Responding to this RFI does not 
provide any advantage or disadvantage to potential applicants if DOE 
chooses to issue a NOFO regarding the subject matter. Final details, 
including the anticipated award size, quantity, and timing of DOE 
funded awards, will be subject to Congressional appropriations and 
direction.
    Any information obtained as a result of this RFI is intended to be 
used by the Government on a non-attribution basis for planning and 
strategy development; this RFI does not constitute a formal 
solicitation for proposals or abstracts. Your response to this notice 
will be treated as information only. DOE will review and consider all 
responses in its formulation of program strategies for the identified 
materials of interest that are the subject of this request. DOE will 
not provide reimbursement for costs incurred in responding to this RFI. 
Respondents are advised that DOE is under no obligation to acknowledge 
receipt of the information received or provide feedback to respondents 
with respect to any information submitted under this RFI. Responses to 
this RFI do not bind DOE to any further actions related to this topic.

V. Confidential Business Information

    Because information received in response to this RFI may be used to 
structure future programs and NOFOs and/or otherwise be made available 
to the public, respondents are strongly advised to NOT include any 
information in their responses that might be considered business 
sensitive, proprietary, or otherwise confidential. If, however, a 
respondent chooses to submit business sensitive, proprietary, or 
otherwise confidential information, it must be clearly and 
conspicuously marked as such in the response.
    Responses containing confidential, proprietary, or privileged 
information must be conspicuously marked as described below. Failure to 
comply with these marking requirements may result in the disclosure of 
the unmarked information under the Freedom of Information Act or 
otherwise. The U.S. Federal Government is not liable for the disclosure 
or use of unmarked information and may use or disclose such information 
for any purpose.
    If your response contains confidential, proprietary, or privileged 
information, you must include a cover sheet marked as follows 
identifying the specific pages containing confidential, proprietary, or 
privileged information:

Notice of Restriction on Disclosure and Use of Data

    Pages [List Applicable Pages] of this response may contain 
confidential, proprietary, or privileged information that is exempt 
from public disclosure. Such information shall be used or disclosed 
only for the purposes described in this RFI [Enter RFI Number]. The 
Government may use or disclose any information that is not 
appropriately marked or otherwise restricted, regardless of source.
    In addition, (1) the header and footer of every page that contains 
confidential, proprietary, or privileged information must be marked as 
follows: ``Contains Confidential, Proprietary, or Privileged 
Information Exempt from Public Disclosure'' and (2) every line and 
paragraph containing proprietary, privileged, or trade secret 
information must be clearly marked with double brackets or 
highlighting.

VI. Evaluation and Administration by Federal and Non-Federal Personnel

    Federal employees are subject to the non-disclosure requirements of 
a criminal statute, the Trade Secrets Act, 18 U.S.C. 1905. The 
Government may seek the advice of qualified non-Federal personnel. The 
Government may also use non-Federal personnel to conduct routine, 
nondiscretionary administrative activities. The respondents, by 
submitting their response, consent to DOE providing their response to 
non-Federal parties. Non-Federal parties given access to responses must 
be subject to an appropriate obligation of confidentiality prior to 
being given the access. Submissions may be reviewed by support 
contractors and private consultants.

Signing Authority

    This document of the Department of Energy was signed on July 01, 
2025, by Chris Wright, Secretary of Energy, U.S. Department of Energy. 
That document with the original signature and date is maintained by 
DOE. For administrative purposes only, and in compliance with 
requirements of the Office of the Federal Register, the undersigned DOE 
Federal Register Liaison Officer has been authorized to sign and submit 
the document in electronic format for

[[Page 45036]]

publication, as an official document of the Department of Energy. This 
administrative process in no way alters the legal effect of this 
document upon publication in the Federal Register.

    Signed in Washington, DC, on September 16, 2025.
Treena V. Garrett,
Federal Register Liaison Officer, U.S. Department of Energy.
[FR Doc. 2025-18058 Filed 9-17-25; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6450-01-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>