<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 89 Issue 216 (Thursday, November 7, 2024)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 89, Number 216 (Thursday, November 7, 2024)]
[Notices]
[Pages 88255-88258]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2024-25898]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY


Privacy Act of 1974; System of Records

AGENCY: U.S. Department of Energy.

ACTION: Notice of a modified system of records.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: As required by the Privacy Act of 1974 and the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) Circulars A-108 and A-130, the Department 
of Energy (DOE or the

[[Page 88256]]

Department) is publishing notice of a modification to an existing 
Privacy Act system of records. DOE proposes to amend System of Records 
DOE-17 DOE Alert System. This System of Records Notice (SORN) is being 
modified to align with new formatting requirements, published by OMB, 
and to ensure appropriate Privacy Act coverage of business processes 
and Privacy Act information.

DATES: This modified SORN will become applicable following the end of 
the public comment period on December 9, 2024 unless comments are 
received that result in a contrary determination.

ADDRESSES: Written comments should be sent to the DOE Desk Officer, 
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and 
Budget, New Executive Office Building, Room 10102, 735 17th Street NW, 
Washington, DC 20503 and to Ken Hunt, Chief Privacy Officer, U.S. 
Department of Energy, 1000 Independence Avenue SW, Rm. 8H-085, 
Washington, DC 20585, by facsimile at (202) 586-8151, or by email at 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#b2c2c0dbc4d3d1cbf2dac39cd6ddd79cd5ddc4"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="bececcd7c8dfddc7fed6cf90dad1db90d9d1c8">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Ken Hunt, Chief Privacy Officer, U.S. 
Department of Energy, 1000 Independence Avenue SW, Rm. 8H-085, 
Washington, DC 20585, by facsimile at (202) 586-8151, by email at 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#1565677c6374766c557d643b717a703b727a63"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="4b3b39223d2a28320b233a652f242e652c243d">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>, or by telephone at (240) 686-9485.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: On January 9, 2009, DOE published a 
Compilation of its Privacy Act systems of records, which included 
System of DOE-17 DOE Alert System. This notice proposes the following 
amendments. The system manager has been updated as the Office of 
Emergency Management. ``Categories of Individuals Covered by the 
System'' now includes contractors. ``Categories of Records in this 
System'' has been updated to include cell phone number. In the 
``Routine Uses'' section, this modified notice deletes a previous 
routine use concerning efforts responding to a suspected or confirmed 
loss of confidentiality of information as it appears in DOE's 
compilation of its Privacy Act systems of records (January 9, 2009) and 
replaces it with one to assist DOE with responding to a suspected or 
confirmed breach of its records of Personally Identifiable Information 
(PII), modeled with language from OMB's Memorandum M-17-12, ``Preparing 
for and Responding to a Breach of Personally Identifiable Information'' 
(January 3, 2017). Further, this notice adds one new routine use to 
ensure that DOE may assist another agency or entity in responding to 
the other agency's or entity's confirmed or suspected breach of PII, as 
appropriate, as aligned with OMB's Memorandum M-17-12. An 
administrative change required by the FOIA Improvement Act of 2016 
extends the length of time a requestor is permitted to file an appeal 
under the Privacy Act from 30 to 90 days. Both the ``System Locations'' 
and ``Administrative, Technical and Physical Safeguards'' sections have 
been modified to reflect the Department's usage of cloud-based services 
for records storage. Language throughout the SORN has been updated to 
align with applicable Federal privacy laws, policies, procedures, and 
best practices.

SYSTEM NAME AND NUMBER:
    DOE-17 DOE Alert System.

SECURITY CLASSIFICATION:
    Unclassified.

SYSTEM LOCATION:
    Systems leveraging this SORN may exist in multiple locations. All 
systems storing records in a cloud-based server are required to use 
government-approved cloud services and follow National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) security and privacy standards for 
access and data retention. Records maintained in a government-approved 
cloud server are accessed through secure data centers in the 
continental United States.
    U.S. Department of Energy, Headquarters, 1000 Independence Avenue 
SW, Washington, DC 20585.

SYSTEM MANAGER(S):
    Director, Office of Emergency Management, Office of Continuity 
Programs and Mission Resilience, U.S. Department of Energy, 1000 
Independence Avenue SW, Washington, DC 20585.

AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM:
    42 U.S.C. 7101 et seq. and 50 U.S.C. 2401 et seq.

PURPOSE(S) OF THE SYSTEM:
    Records in this system are used by the Department to alert those 
employees who have requested and registered to be notified in the event 
of an emergency at DOE or its facilities.

CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM:
    Current DOE, including National Nuclear Security Administration 
(NNSA), employees and contractor employees, consultants, and board 
members.

CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:
    The records include the name of the individual, work and home email 
addresses, work and home telephone numbers, cellphone numbers, and 
pager numbers.

RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES:
    The individual to whom the record pertains provides all information 
maintained in the system.

ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIES 
OF USERS AND PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:
    1. A record from this system may be disclosed as a routine use for 
the purpose of an investigation, settlement of claims, or the 
preparation and conduct of litigation to (1) persons representing the 
Department in the investigation, settlement or litigation, and to 
individuals assisting in such representation; (2) others involved in 
the investigation, settlement, and litigation, and their 
representatives and individuals assisting those representatives; (3) 
witnesses, potential witnesses, or their representatives and 
assistants; and (4) any other persons who possess information 
pertaining to the matter when it is necessary to obtain information or 
testimony relevant to the matter.
    2. A record from this system may be disclosed as a routine use in 
court or administrative proceedings to the tribunals, counsel, other 
parties, witnesses, and the public (in publicly available pleadings, 
filings, or discussion in open court) when such disclosure: (1) is 
relevant to, and necessary for, the proceeding; (2) is compatible with 
the purpose for which the Department collected the records; and (3) the 
proceedings involve:
    (a) The Department, its predecessor agencies, current or former 
contractors of the Department, or other United States Government 
agencies and their components, or
    (b) A current or former employee of the Department and its 
predecessor agencies, current or former contractors of the Department, 
or other United States Government agencies and their components, who is 
acting in an official capacity, or in any individual capacity where the 
Department or other United States Government agency has agreed to 
represent the employee.
    3. A record from this system may be disclosed as a routine use to 
the appropriate local, tribal, state, or federal agency when records, 
alone or in conjunction with other information, indicate a violation or 
potential violation of law whether civil, criminal, or regulatory in 
nature, and whether

[[Page 88257]]

arising by general statute or particular program pursuant thereto.
    4. A record from this system may be disclosed as a routine use to a 
member of Congress submitting a request involving a constituent when 
the constituent has requested assistance from the member concerning the 
subject matter of the record. The member of Congress must provide a 
copy of the constituent's signed request for assistance.
    5. A record from this system may be disclosed as a routine use to 
DOE contractors in performance of their contracts, and their officers 
and employees who have a need for the record in the performance of 
their duties. Those provided information under this routine use are 
subject to the same limitations applicable to Department officers and 
employees under the Privacy Act.
    6. A record from this system may be disclosed as a routine use to 
appropriate agencies, entities, and persons when (1) the Department 
suspects or has confirmed that there has been a breach of the system of 
records; (2) the Department has determined that as a result of the 
suspected or confirmed breach there is a risk of harm to individuals, 
DOE (including its information systems, programs, and operations), the 
Federal Government, or national security; and (3) the disclosure made 
to such agencies, entities, and persons is reasonably necessary to 
assist in connection with the Department's efforts to respond to the 
suspected or confirmed breach or to prevent, minimize, or remedy such 
harm.
    7. A record from this system may be disclosed as a routine use to 
another Federal agency or Federal entity, when the Department 
determines that information from this system of records is reasonably 
necessary to assist the recipient agency or entity in (1) responding to 
a suspected or confirmed breach or (2) preventing, minimizing, or 
remedying the risk of harm to individuals, the recipient agency or 
entity (including its information systems, programs, and operations), 
the Federal Government, or national security, resulting from a 
suspected or confirmed breach.

POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORAGE OF RECORDS:
    Records may be stored as paper records or electronic media.

POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR RETRIEVAL OF RECORDS:
    Records are retrieved by the name of the individual.

POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR RETENTION AND DISPOSAL OF RECORDS:
    Retention and disposition of these records is in accordance with 
the National Archives and Records Administration-approved records 
disposition schedule with a retention of 3 years.

ADMINISTRATIVE, TECHNICAL, AND PHYSICAL SAFEGUARDS:
    Electronic records may be secured and maintained on a cloud-based 
software server and operating system that resides in Federal Risk and 
Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) and Federal Information 
Security Modernization Act (FISMA) hosting environment. Data located in 
the cloud-based server is firewalled and encrypted at rest and in 
transit. The security mechanisms for handling data at rest and in 
transit are in accordance with DOE encryption standards. Records are 
protected from unauthorized access through the following appropriate 
safeguards:
    <bullet> Administrative: Access to all records is limited to lawful 
government purposes only, with access to electronic records based on 
role and either two-factor authentication or password protection. The 
system requires passwords to be complex and to be changed frequently. 
Users accessing system records undergo frequent training in Privacy Act 
and information security requirements. Security and privacy controls 
are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
    <bullet> Technical: Computerized records systems are safeguarded on 
Departmental networks configured for role-based access based on job 
responsibilities and organizational affiliation. Privacy and security 
controls are in place for this system and are updated in accordance 
with applicable requirements as determined by NIST and DOE directives 
and guidance.
    <bullet> Physical: Computer servers on which electronic records are 
stored are located in secured Department facilities, which are 
protected by security guards, identification badges, and cameras. Paper 
copies of all records are locked in file cabinets, file rooms, or 
offices and are under the control of authorized personnel. Access to 
these facilities is granted only to authorized personnel and each 
person granted access to the system must be an individual authorized to 
use or administer the system.

RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:
    The Department follows the procedures outlined in 10 CFR 1008.4. 
Valid identification of the individual making the request is required 
before information will be processed, given, access granted, or a 
correction considered, to ensure that information is processed, given, 
corrected, or records disclosed or corrected only at the request of the 
proper person.

CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:
    Any individual may submit a request to the System Manager and 
request a copy of any records relating to them. In accordance with 10 
CFR 1008.11, any individual may appeal the denial of a request made by 
him or her for information about or for access to or correction or 
amendment of records. An appeal shall be filed within 90 calendar days 
after receipt of the denial. When an appeal is filed by mail, the 
postmark is conclusive as to timeliness. The appeal shall be in writing 
and must be signed by the individual. The words ``PRIVACY ACT APPEAL'' 
should appear in capital letters on the envelope and the letter. 
Appeals relating to DOE records shall be directed to the Director, 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA), 1000 Independence Avenue SW, 
Washington, DC 20585.

NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES:
    In accordance with the DOE regulation implementing the Privacy Act, 
at 10 CFR part 1008, a request by an individual to determine if a 
system of records contains information about themselves should be 
directed to the U.S. Department of Energy, Headquarters, Privacy Act 
Officer. The request should include the requester's complete name and 
the time period for which records are sought.

EXEMPTIONS PROMULGATED FOR THE SYSTEM:
    None.

HISTORY:
    This SORN was last published in the Federal Register, 74 FR 1019-
1020, on January 9, 2009.

Signing Authority

    This document of the Department of Energy was signed on November 1, 
2024, by Ann Dunkin, Senior Agency Official for Privacy, pursuant to 
delegated authority from the Secretary of Energy. That document with 
the original signature and date is maintained by DOE. For 
administrative purposes only, and in compliance with requirements of 
the Office of the Federal Register, the undersigned DOE Federal 
Register Liaison Officer has been authorized to sign and submit the 
document in electronic format for publication, as an official document 
of the Department of Energy. This administrative process in no way 
alters

[[Page 88258]]

the legal effect of this document upon publication in the Federal 
Register.

    Signed in Washington, DC, on November 4, 2024.
Jennifer Hartzell,
Alternate Federal Register Liaison Officer, U.S. Department of Energy.
[FR Doc. 2024-25898 Filed 11-6-24; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6450-01-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>