<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 89 Issue 243 (Wednesday, December 18, 2024)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 89, Number 243 (Wednesday, December 18, 2024)]
[Notices]
[Pages 102872-102874]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 2024-29976]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY


Notice of Intent to Prepare an Environmental Impact Statement for 
the Appalachian Hydrogen Hub (ARCH2), (DOE/EIS-0569)

AGENCY: Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations, U.S. Department of 
Energy.

ACTION: Notice of intent to prepare an environmental impact statement, 
notice of scoping meetings, request for comments.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) announces its intent to 
prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) pursuant to the 
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and applicable NEPA 
implementing regulations to assess the potential environmental impacts 
of the proposed action of providing financial assistance to Battelle 
Memorial Institute (Battelle) to facilitate the design, construction, 
operation, and maintenance of the Appalachian Hydrogen Hub (also 
referred to as the Appalachian Regional Clean Hydrogen Hub or ARCH2) in 
the Appalachian Region including Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia. 
DOE is issuing this Notice of Intent to inform the public about the 
proposed action; announce plans to conduct public scoping meetings; 
invite public participation in the scoping process; and solicit public 
comments for consideration in establishing the scope of the EIS, 
including the range of reasonable alternatives and the potential 
environmental impacts to be analyzed.

DATES: The public scoping period for the EIS starts with the 
publication of this notice of intent (NOI) and ends on March 3, 2025. 
DOE will hold one virtual public scoping meeting at the following date 
and time (eastern time):
    <bullet> Thursday, January 16, 2025 at 6 p.m.-8 p.m.
    DOE will hold three in-person public scoping meetings. Dates, 
times, and locations are to be determined and will be shared on the 
DOE's web page for this EIS no less than 15 days before the meetings.
    All meetings are open to the public and free to attend. Details on 
how to participate in the virtual and in-person public scoping meetings 
are available on the DOE's web page for this EIS: <a href="https://www.energy.gov/nepa/doeeis-0569-appalachian-hydrogen-hub-multiple-locations">https://www.energy.gov/nepa/doeeis-0569-appalachian-hydrogen-hub-multiple-locations</a>. In defining the scope of the EIS, DOE will consider all 
scoping comments received or postmarked by March 3, 2025. Comments 
received or postmarked after the scoping period end date will be 
considered to the extent practicable.

ADDRESSES: Oral or written comments may be provided at the public 
scoping meetings or submitted in any of the following ways:
    <bullet> Through the <a href="http://regulations.gov">regulations.gov</a> web portal: Navigate to 
<a href="http://www.regulations.gov">www.regulations.gov</a> and search for Docket No. DOE-HQ-2024-0082 and 
follow the instructions for submitting comments.
    <bullet> Mail or Hand Delivery Service: Send comments in an 
envelope labeled ``DOE/EIS-0569'' and addressed to TRC APPALACHIAN 
HYDROGEN HUB Coordinator, Teays Corporate Centre, 135 Corporate Center 
Drive, Suite 540, Scott Depot, West Virginia 25560

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Sarah Moore, Project Manager, Office 
of Clean Energy Demonstrations, U.S. Department of Energy, 1000 
Independence Ave SW, Washington, DC 20585, email 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#a3ece0e6e7fce2f1e0eb91fce6eaf0e3cbd28dc7ccc68dc4ccd5"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="6b24282e2f342a39282359342e22382b031a450f040e450c041d">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>, or telephone (202) 309-2037.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Background

    In the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, commonly known as 
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL), Congress directed DOE to 
establish a Regional Clean Hydrogen Hubs (H2Hubs) program to create 
regional networks of hydrogen producers, consumers, and local 
connective infrastructure to accelerate the use of hydrogen as a clean 
energy carrier. The Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations (OCED) within 
DOE is implementing the Regional Clean Hydrogen Hubs program and will 
use the NEPA process to help it decide whether to provide financial 
assistance for the H2Hubs.
    Congress directed DOE to select H2Hubs using certain criteria. 
Specifically, Congress directed DOE to select H2Hubs that will use a 
diversity of feedstocks to produce clean hydrogen, including at least 
one H2Hub that will demonstrate the production of clean hydrogen from 
fossil fuels, one H2Hub that will demonstrate the production of clean 
hydrogen from renewables, and one H2Hub that will demonstrate the 
production of clean hydrogen from nuclear energy. Congress also 
directed DOE to select H2Hubs that will use clean hydrogen in a 
diversity of end uses, including at least one H2Hub that will 
demonstrate the use of clean hydrogen in the following sectors: 
electric power generation, industrial, residential and commercial 
heating, and transportation. Congress required that DOE give priority 
to H2Hubs that are likely to create opportunities for skilled training 
and long-term employment to the greatest number of residents of the 
region. Congress also directed DOE to include geographic diversity, 
directing that DOE locate H2Hubs in different regions of the United 
States, and that the H2Hubs are to use the energy resources that are 
abundant in their respective regions. Congress further required DOE to 
select, to the maximum extent practicable, at least two H2Hubs in the 
regions of the United States with the greatest natural gas resources.
    DOE issued a Funding Opportunity Announcement (FOA-0002779) to 
solicit applications for H2Hubs. DOE selected the Appalachian Hydrogen 
Hub for award negotiations following a rigorous Merit Review process to 
identify meritorious applications to the Regional Clean Hydrogen Hubs 
Program based on the criteria listed in FOA-0002779. DOE has provided 
limited funding in support of preliminary Appalachian Hydrogen Hub 
planning activities.
    The Appalachian Hydrogen Hub, as proposed, satisfies certain 
criteria Congress required in the BIL for the Regional Clean Hydrogen 
Hubs program. The Appalachian Hydrogen Hub has the potential to 
demonstrate the production of clean hydrogen from fossil fuels. The 
Appalachian Hydrogen Hub proposes to use clean hydrogen in a diversity 
of end uses, including but not limited to industry, power generation, 
and transportation. Further, the Appalachian Hydrogen Hub would create 
opportunities for skilled training and long-term employment for 
residents of the region. In addition, the location of the Appalachian 
Hydrogen Hub in the Appalachian Region that includes Ohio, 
Pennsylvania, and West Virginia meets the criterion requiring 
geographic diversity within the Regional Clean Hydrogen Hubs program. 
The Appalachian Hydrogen Hub also satisfies the criterion that DOE 
select a Hub in a region of the United States with the greatest natural 
gas resources.
    The Appalachian Hydrogen Hub is proposed to consist of a suite of 
demonstration projects involving clean hydrogen production, 
transportation, and end uses located within the Appalachian Region that 
includes Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia. Battelle is the primary 
funding recipient and lead Appalachian Hydrogen Hub

[[Page 102873]]

manager. As currently structured, the Appalachian Hydrogen Hub 
encompasses 12 proposed projects, including hydrogen production 
facilities that could produce at least 1,700 metric tons per day of 
clean hydrogen (autothermal reformation facilities with carbon capture, 
biomass pyrolysis facilities, electrolysis facilities, and facilities 
for recovering hydrogen from waste gases), hydrogen liquefiers, and a 
range of end uses including residential fuel cells, materials handling 
equipment, mobility, and industrial uses, including production of 
ammonia, urea, and low-carbon aviation fuel.

Purpose and Scope of the EIS

    DOE will prepare an EIS (DOE/EIS-0569) to evaluate the potential 
impacts to the human environment associated with funding the 
Appalachian Hydrogen Hub. The EIS will evaluate the potential impacts 
associated with the types of hydrogen infrastructure and technologies 
proposed in the Appalachian Hydrogen Hub, such as impacts from 
electricity and water usage and rates of emissions, that are inherent 
to the technologies and infrastructure regardless of where they may be 
deployed. The EIS will help inform DOE's decision as to whether to 
carry the Appalachian Hydrogen Hub forward for project-specific funding 
decisions but will not directly authorize funding for specific 
Appalachian Hydrogen Hub projects.
    If DOE decides to provide funding for the construction and 
operation of the Appalachian Hydrogen Hub, DOE will complete additional 
NEPA reviews to evaluate the potential site-specific impacts of 
individual proposed projects to make site-specific funding decisions. 
In addition to being subject to DOE's NEPA review, with associated 
public scoping and comment periods as appropriate, individual projects 
will be required to adhere to the requirements of all applicable 
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations.

Purpose and Need for the Proposed Action

    The purpose and need for DOE's action is to comply with its 
statutory mandate in BIL to catalyze investment in the production, 
processing, delivery, storage, and end-use of clean hydrogen; and 
contribute to the development of a national clean hydrogen network. The 
proposed action of funding the Appalachian Hydrogen Hub would fulfill 
this mandate by accelerating the deployment of clean hydrogen 
technologies and enabling infrastructure to attract greater investments 
from the private sector and promote substantial U.S. manufacturing of 
numerous hydrogen technologies.
    DOE's purpose and need in funding the Appalachian Hydrogen Hub also 
includes funding a clean hydrogen hub that meets certain BIL criteria 
for the H2Hubs. The proposed Appalachian Hydrogen Hub meets these 
criteria by:
    <bullet> Demonstrating feedstock diversity by including the 
production of clean hydrogen from fossil fuels.
    <bullet> Demonstrating end use diversity by including the use of 
clean hydrogen in the electric power generation, industry, and 
transportation sectors.
    <bullet> Enabling DOE to meet the geographic diversity criterion by 
being located in the Appalachian Region and using energy resources that 
are abundant in that region.
    <bullet> Being one of at least two H2Hubs located in regions of the 
United States with the greatest natural gas resources.
    <bullet> Creating opportunities for skilled training and long-term 
employment for residents in the region.

Proposed Action, No Action, and Preliminary Alternatives

Proposed Action

    DOE's proposed action is to provide funding to support the 
construction and operation of the Appalachian Hydrogen Hub, as proposed 
by Battelle, in the Appalachian region that includes Ohio, 
Pennsylvania, and West Virginia. The proposed Appalachian Hydrogen Hub 
would include the production, storage, delivery, and end-use of clean 
hydrogen using a variety of technologies. Hydrogen production 
technologies being considered include autothermal reforming with carbon 
capture, electrolysis, pyrolysis, and capture and purification of 
hydrogen byproduct from chlor-alkali processes. Methods of hydrogen 
storage may include above-ground tanks, tube trailers, and/or 
underground storage. Delivery options may include refueling stations, 
liquefaction, and trucking, as well as the delivery of hydrogen 
derivatives such as ammonia, urea, or low-carbon aviation fuel which 
could include delivery via rail, barge, truck, or pipeline. The 
Appalachian Hydrogen Hub is considering a broad variety of end-use 
applications, including vehicles (buses, medium and heavy-duty trucks), 
materials handling equipment, industrial heat, blending to natural gas 
distribution systems, power generation, stationary fuel cells, and 
production of hydrogen derivatives, including ammonia, urea, and low-
carbon aviation fuel. Appalachian Hydrogen Hub projects and site 
locations are in development. DOE will evaluate specific projects and 
site locations in subsequent tiered NEPA reviews.

No Action Alternative

    Under the No Action Alternative, DOE would not provide funding to 
Battelle for the construction and operation of the Appalachian Hydrogen 
Hub, with the assumption that the H2Hub would not be developed. The no 
action alternative provides a benchmark for comparison with 
environmental impacts of the other alternatives.

Preliminary Action Alternatives

    The EIS will evaluate reasonable alternatives that are technically 
and economically feasible and meet the purpose and need for the 
proposed action. Preliminarily, DOE has identified three alternatives 
that potentially address the purpose and need stated above:
    (1) DOE funding for the proposed Appalachian Hydrogen Hub: The 
proposed action alternative as described above.
    (2) DOE funding for an expanded Appalachian Hydrogen Hub: An action 
alternative that considers the hydrogen technologies and infrastructure 
in the proposed action plus reasonably foreseeable clean hydrogen 
technologies and infrastructure that, while not currently considered in 
the proposed action, could be proposed for DOE funding.
    (3) DOE funding for a reduced Appalachian Hydrogen Hub: An action 
alternative that is smaller in scope wherein DOE would fund only a 
portion of the proposed action.

Summary of Potential Impacts

    DOE's analysis in the EIS will focus on potentially significant 
environmental impacts from construction and operation of the 
Appalachian Hydrogen Hub's proposed types of hydrogen technologies and 
infrastructure, as well as the potential cumulative impacts resulting 
from reasonably foreseeable past, present, and future projects in the 
same region. Accordingly, in the EIS, DOE anticipates evaluating 
potential non-site-specific impacts related to: (1) land use and 
infrastructure, (2) atmospheric conditions and air quality, (3) climate 
change and greenhouse gasses, (4) hydrologic conditions and water 
quality, (5) geology, seismicity and soils, (6) socioeconomic 
conditions, (7) environmental justice, (8) energy resources, (9) noise 
and vibration, (10) transportation and accidents, (11) intentional 
destructive acts, and (12) human health and safety. This list is not 
intended to be all-inclusive or to imply a predetermination of 
potential

[[Page 102874]]

significant impacts. DOE invites interested stakeholders to suggest 
specific issues, including possible mitigation measures, within these 
general categories or others, to be considered in the EIS.

Anticipated Permits and Authorizations

    DOE does not anticipate that permits and authorizations will be 
needed for agency action because the EIS would not authorize the 
construction and operation of any project in the Appalachian Hydrogen 
Hub. The permits and authorizations required for the Appalachian 
Hydrogen Hub projects would be identified in subsequent site-specific 
NEPA analyses for those projects.

Schedule for Decision-Making Process

    After the draft EIS is completed, DOE will publish a notice of 
availability (NOA) and request public comments on the draft EIS. DOE 
currently expects to issue the NOA in October 2025. After the public 
comment period ends, DOE will review and respond to comments received 
and will develop the final EIS. DOE currently expects to make the final 
EIS available to the public in April 2026. A record of decision will be 
completed no sooner than 30 days after the final EIS is released, in 
accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

Scoping Process

    This NOI commences the public scoping process to identify issues 
and potential alternatives for consideration in the EIS. Throughout the 
scoping process, Federal agencies, Tribes, State and local governments, 
and the public have the opportunity to help DOE identify significant 
resources and issues, reasonable alternatives, mitigation measures, and 
other pertinent information that DOE should consider in the EIS. DOE 
will hold public scoping meetings at the times and dates described 
above under the DATES section. DOE will post information on how to 
participate in the virtual and in-person public meetings on the EIS 
website listed previously, in advance of the meetings. The public will 
have the opportunity to comment on the scope of the EIS. DOE 
representatives will be available to answer questions and provide 
additional information on the NEPA process to meeting attendees. In 
addition to providing comments at the public scoping meetings, 
stakeholders may submit written comments as described in the ADDRESSES 
section.
    Comments may be broad in nature or restricted to specific areas of 
concern, but they should be directly relevant to the NEPA process, or 
potential environmental impacts. The scoping process allows the public 
and interested parties to shape the EIS impact analysis, focusing on 
the areas of greatest importance and identifying areas requiring less 
attention. DOE will consider the comments received on the scope of the 
EIS during the 75-day scoping period as it prepares the draft EIS.
    OCED does not consider anonymous scoping comments. Please include 
your name and address as part of your scoping comment. All scoping 
comments, including the names, addresses, and other personally 
identifiable information included in the comment, will be part of the 
administrative record. DOE will protect privileged or confidential 
information that you submit when required by Exemption 4 of the Freedom 
of Information Act (FOIA), which applies to trade secrets and 
commercial or financial information that is privileged or confidential. 
Please label privileged or confidential information ``Contains 
Confidential Information'' and consider submitting such information as 
a separate attachment. Information that is not labeled as privileged or 
confidential may be regarded by DOE as suitable for public release. DOE 
will invite Tribal government-to-government consultations.

Request for Comment on Alternatives and Effects, as Well as on Relevant 
Information, Studies, or Analyses With Respect to the Proposed Action

    Federal, State, and local agencies, along with Indian Tribal 
Nations and other stakeholders that may be interested in or affected by 
the proposed action, are invited to participate in the scoping process 
and, if eligible, may request or be requested by the DOE to participate 
in the development of the environmental analysis as a cooperating 
agency. DOE requests data, comments, views, information, analysis, 
alternatives, or suggestions relevant to the proposed action from the 
public; affected Federal, Tribal, State, and local governments, 
agencies, and offices; the scientific community; industry; or any other 
interested party.
    Specifically, DOE requests information on the following topics:
    (1) Potential effects that the proposed action could have on 
biological, physical, socioeconomic, cultural, or other resources.
    (2) Other potential reasonable alternatives to the proposed action 
that DOE should consider, including additional or alternative 
avoidance, minimization, and mitigation measures.
    (3) Information on other current or planned activities in, or in 
the vicinity of, the proposed action, that could impact one another or 
contribute to cumulative impacts.
    (4) Other information, studies, or analyses relevant to the 
proposed action and its impacts on the human environment.
    To promote informed decision-making, comments should be as specific 
as possible and should provide as much detail as necessary to 
meaningfully and fully inform DOE of why the issues raised are 
important to the agency's review of the proposed action.
    The draft EIS will include as an appendix a summary of issues 
raised in public scoping comments that DOE considered in preparing the 
EIS and comments outside the scope of the analysis.

Signing Authority

    This document of the Department of Energy was signed on December 
11, 2024, by Kelly Cummins, Acting Director, Office of Clean Energy 
Demonstrations, pursuant to delegated authority from the Secretary of 
Energy. That document with the original signature and date is 
maintained by DOE. For administrative purposes only, and in compliance 
with requirements of the Office of the Federal Register, the 
undersigned DOE Federal Register Liaison Officer has been authorized to 
sign and submit the document in electronic format for publication, as 
an official document of the Department of Energy. This administrative 
process in no way alters the legal effect of this document upon 
publication in the Federal Register.

    Signed in Washington, DC, on December 13, 2024.
Treena V. Garrett,
Federal Register Liaison Officer, U.S. Department of Energy.
[FR Doc. 2024-29976 Filed 12-17-24; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6450-01-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>